[u'Good evening everybody So in this class . of coordination chemistry we will talk something . related to the coordination bond . which is forming particularly when we see . that a particular metal centre say if iron . is there and it is not the metallic iron . but it is . iron in some oxidation state n or n plus  . So when n is equal to  we get both the . plus  as well as plus  oxidation states . So if . we just consider how the ferrous ion as well . as the ferric ion will form such coordinate . bond How these coordinate bonds form? . Because this is the basis of this particular . topic of chemistry where we will find from . the very simple molecule from our very . early days from the studies in school level . we all know what is the typical water molecule . Why we are so interested about knowing the . molecule of water? Because we all the time . whenever we start any reaction related . to any metal salt we see that we have a metal . salt any metal salt it can be our ferrous . chloride it can be our nickel chloride or . it . can be our copper chloride so we have some . corresponding oxidation states on it depending . upon the number of C l groups . attached to the metal salt So all of them . are bivalent So interesting thing happens . basically when we try to do this reaction . it is . not simply reaction but we try to do or try . to get the corresponding solution of those . metal salts in say a typical solvent which . is . our water . So what is happening is a very simple reaction . where we just try to dissolve this salts say . nickel chloride in water So will it stay . as this nickel chloride form or will it form . something else? That is very important that . means how these dipoles this water . molecules are behaving it has a angular shape . we all know So it has a angle of  degree . Where this O H bonds two O H bonds are in . some typical angle and these are not going . for any kind of dissociation that means . the proton is not losing from there So minus . H plus is not taking place So we can have . that means we know the typical pH of . the solution that means it is a neutral pH . So at neutral pH if we have some amount of . water and we try to dissolve this nickel . chloride what is happening there? That means . how this Ni  plus will be present there in . an environment of these water . molecules? So these are very simple and some . basic questions what we can think in our mind . Similarly in our system or any biological . system any living organisms in our body also . so if we have any biological system where . the metal centre is present say M is present . in some oxidation state M can be   or . anything So in biological system the . environment is very much related to the water . environment but in this particular case we . have some other groups available . within the biological fluid that means we . can have instead of the water environment . we can have a biological fluid environment . And this particular fluid environment can . also have water molecules . So from the biological system also how these . water molecules present over there can go . and interact with the metal ion So . basically the formation of these coordination . bond will lead us to some kind of study where . we see that a typical coordinate bond . will form between a metal centre The metal . in some positive oxidation state in M n plus . and this particular water molecule so . from here just what we see that if M n plus . is there and is going to interact with the . water molecule and obviously you can have . two atoms on water molecule one is the oxygen . atom and the other is the hydrogen atom and . the possibility for interacting with . this is that we have the lone pair of electrons . we all know on the water molecules . So this arrow what we are showing is the . corresponding interaction how it is interacting? . It is not the corresponding direction . what we will show occasionally in showing . all these coordinate bond where we see that . this lone pair of electrons will be donated . to the metal centre because the metal is in . positive oxidation state It has some vacant . orbital\u2019s available that means it can accept . the electron density from these water molecule . particularly from the lone pair electron density . from this oxygen atom . So in this introductory class today what . we are just going to see that how these interactions . are taking place that means the very . simple interaction what we can all the time . can ask our students that what type of interaction . you can have where you have this . particular water molecules are present say . in some test tube as the typical solvent . We can go from one solvent to the other that . means we can go from water molecule to alcohol . we can go to alcohol to acetone we can go . to alcohol to acetonitrile . So if we can fully understand the corresponding . interaction that what type of interaction . the metal centre can a give you with . that of our water molecule then only we can . extend further the corresponding interactions . what are possible with other type of . solvent molecules which are having some amount . of lone pair of electron density . So this particular class of coordination . chemistry in the introduction part what we . can see that it is the person which is Alfred . Werner is a Swiss chemist and he was there . during the period of  to  So whatever . worked he did based on that . basically so he is the pioneer in this particular . area of giving the information\u2019s related . to the corresponding reaction basically the . inorganic chemist the inorganic chemist and . what we can see that we can interact we can . see some of the reactions what we . have just now telling you that it is the interaction . of any metal salt any chloride salt like . iron chloride copper chloride or nickel . chloride with that of our water . And he first studied the corresponding interaction . of cobalt  chloride that means cobalt in . plus  oxidation state the means the . elemental cobalt the metallic cobalt has . lost its  electron to give in the trivalent . state and the corresponding inorganic metallic . salt is isolated as its corresponding chloride . version So this cobaltic chloride when it . reacts with ammonia that means liquor . ammonia it is not the ammonia gas but it . is the ammonia which is present in liquor . that means in solution So how it is . interacting with the ammonia molecule? In . ammonia molecule we have large amount of water . also available So whether . specifically this cobalt the trivalent cobalt . which is present over there as cobalt  plus . is interacting with ammonia . So whatever we are just talking to see is . that interaction of cobalt  chloride with . ammonia So this has two aspects that it . is not . in the plus  oxidation states which we occasionally . find that means the solid cobalt  chloride . is a cobalt task chloride which can . be solid and if it is in solution we make . this in solution in water So in solution . of water what is forming? So if we have this . one . so these are the problems still at the particular . time and we do not know much about all these . things that cobalt task chloride is . our hand and we are adding water molecule . to it and what type of interaction can take . place with the cobalt task chloride with . that of our water molecule . And then we are adding a very simple molecule . of ammonia So when we are having these water . just now we have seen that we . have the water molecule which has two lone . pair of electrons and this is now getting . changed So we are bringing another . molecule as ammonia So in one particular . molecule we have two lone pair of electrons . and in another case we have a single lone . pair of electron . So if this particular metal centre particularly . the cobalt in plus  oxidation state which . has some vacant orbital and if this electron . density is donated to the cobalt so if it . goes to the cobalt centre which has some vacant . orbital So what we expect that this . particular one also available in some orbital . So electron density is there depending upon . the corresponding molecular orbital if . we know all is very simple treatment for the . corresponding molecular orbital treatment . for the formation of ammonia molecule . from the individual atoms That means  nitrogen . is forming the molecule by interacting with .  hydrogen atoms . So after forming those molecular orbital\u2019s . so this is a typical treatment for getting . the corresponding molecular orbital picture . of . the ammonia molecule and where we find that . one particular orbital will be there which . is our vacant nonbonding orbital that . means it is not engaged in forming some bond . with hydrogen or anybody else So these two . orbital\u2019s will be available for forming . a new bond So this lone pair of electrons . are available for forming a new bond like . a cation most simple cation is the proton . So . ammonia we all know very easily and we all . know from our school days from our childhood . days that ammonia when reacting . with H plus is forming the very simple the . cationic species the ammonium ion and we have . the corresponding over all charge of . one positive one unit of positive charge . is there which is due to the presence of the . charge on the proton . So this tetrahedral ammonium ion formation . which can also tells us that this particular . lone pair of electron which has been . donated for a very simple system if we consider . that this is the hydrogen because after formation . of ammonium ion is not . possible to distinguish the hydrogen atoms . which were already present in the ammonia . molecule and which has newly reached . there to attach to the nitrogen atom So . all these four are indistinguishable So . in this tetrahedral molecule ammonium . tetrahedral molecule what we see that a new . bond is forming . So this is basically our N H bond and why . this new N H bond is formed? It is due to . the availability of the non bonding electron . pair and that non bonding electron pair has . been donated to the hydrogen orbital because . the proton has no electron So it is only . a positively charged species So this that . is why it is called also as a proton and which . has a vacant orbital which can accept . nicely the electron pair from the donor atom . So the donor acceptor reaction can take place . In other words we also consider these reaction . is as the corresponding acid base reaction . So we get a corresponding new N H . bond So a new N H bond is formed and which . is of coordinate type because both the electrons . have been donated from the . nitrogen lone pair and which has the accepted . by the hydrogen So if we can extend this . particular idea is a very simple idea of . reaction of cobalt chloride with ammonia that . the same type of reaction can also take place . when cobalt chloride is reacting with . the corresponding ammonia molecule and if . we see that this particular cobalt that means . the trivalent cobalt is definitely then . forming a new bond which is our cobalt nitrogen . bond . So that is the question for all this sort . of study in this coordination chemistry class . that whether we should have some cobalt . nitrogen bond like that N H bond which is . forming from the reaction of the proton with . that of our ammonia So it took several . years to know is not so easy at that particular . time because the analytical chemistry the . analytical techniques and all these things . were not available during this period So . about more than  years back people were . trying to speculate this things is basically . the history of coordination chemistry where . we see that whether this particular type of . cobalt nitrogen bond will be formed or not . that was a basically a mere speculation . So what we see that if we consider like that . of your interaction like nitrogen with hydrogen . that means the proton so your H plus . is the well known proton So our metal centre . that means the cobalt in the trivalent state . that particular thing that means the . centre which is trivalent should also function . as an acid centre and our ammonia therefore . is also can be considering as a base . So basically what we are talking during the . formation of this cobalt nitrogen bond is . that cobaltic ion the cobalt in trivalent . state . is interacting with ammonia forming a corresponding . salt type of things So definitely it will . form a salt type of thing if one . counterpart of this is a typical acid and . another is a typical base So between an . acid and base the reaction will take place . and we . should get a corresponding salt as the product . So this reaction this person studied with . ammonia to identify this particular reaction . but when Alfred Werner got the product of . these and analysis of this product because . this simple reactions what we can have is . that when we react this cobalt chloride with . ammonia we get a particular product where . the stoichiometry we can analyze because some . amount of analytical technique was . that time available that means it is based . on the amount of nitrogen present in the molecule . So this was the corresponding entity typical . entity that means the cobalt chloride is already . present which was their original . formula and  equivalent of ammonia has been . added to it giving a corresponding compound . depending upon its different form it . has different color and they are solid in . nature So if we just consider what just . now we have discussed that if it is a typical . acid . base reaction and we are getting some clue . for the formation of the cobalt nitrogen bond . then what is happening with these . chlorides presents already with the cobalt . salt . So we all know that a typical salt like this . the any chloride salt if this particular . thing is that when we get that any salt from . our . school days or anywhere what we see that the . chloride identification that means the chloride . is as present as sodium chloride So . this C l minus present in sodium chloride . can be identified very easily by the addition . of silver nitrate and within that silver nitrate . we have the A g plus and that A g plus will . react with sodium chloride forming A g C l . as its corresponding white precipitate that . means the base . So what does it mean basically for this very . simple reaction what we have learnt from . our school days is that if we have any . anionic chloride so this is a typical corresponding . salt So is ionic salt is ionic solid also . sodium chloride is a solid So this ionic . solid where we have discreet N a plus and . C l minus is present so is ionic compound . and it has a electrovalent bond we consider . So we have C l minus and this C l minus can . be reacted with the silver ion present in . silver nitrate giving you the silver chloride . precipitation . So what about the simple cobalt chloride . salt? So like sodium chloride this is also . cobalt  chloride So it has also the same . type . of C l minus that means the chloride ion present . in the sodium chloride is same as that is . present in cobalt chloride that means the . cobaltic chloride So the same reaction with . A g plus with definitely go for the precipitation . of silver chloride as white solid in . solution because that is getting precipitated . out from the solution . Now we are situation is little bit different . because we have added to this cobalt chloride . salt  ammonia molecules and we got . some composition of these which is C o C l .  centre dot  H  O Now the puzzle has . come that how how this cobalt chloride . bond are there whether it is similar to that . of our chloride ion or if it is something . forming over there? So what we see that if . we . have already the cobalt chloride bond present . in it that means it is not like sodium chloride . it is some amount of covalent . corrected is there or we have the cobalt nitrogen . bond So that can be tested . How the same silver nitrate solution can be . used? In one case we see that whatever amount . of C l minus was present in cobalt . chloride salt is coming out from that particular . complex we consider it as the reaction product . which is a completely different . compound having no character of the original . cobaltic chloride salt So is a definitely . a new product is a new reaction product . we have . In this particular case depending upon the . stoichiometry of the silver nitrate utilized . for removal of all the chloride anions and . the . amount of silver chloride is precipitated . out tells us that all the  chloride ions . are converted to silver chloride That means . all the . chloride ions are present in this particular . species as C l minus that means the anionic . C l minus they are So it is not directly . attaching to the cobalt centre giving some . covalent bond this is giving a typical ionic . bond and all the chloride ions can be . removed but we also get to other compounds . where we get the stoichiometry which is typically . different one where cobaltic . chloride has  ammonia molecules and in another . case we have cobaltic chloride with  ammonia . molecules . In the formal in this case that means where . we have  ammonia molecules so this number . of ammonia molecules present in the . molecule of this compound is important So . when it is  we get  chloride anions as silver . chloride when it is  we get at one . case  molecules of silver chloride In another . case  molecules of silver chloride that means . we are able to remove  of these . chlorides at C l minus that means we have . all together  chloride anions we could remove .  of them that means  we are unable . to remove . That is the most important and fascinating . observation what Alfred Werner made that time . and an another case also like that the . previous case where the stoichiometry was . different but we could remove  of these . chlorides as silver chloride So the third . variety where we have only thing is that the . stoichiometry is different here now you have .  N H  groups and when we treat it . with  of the  chlorides can be precipitated . as silver chloride Now we are not getting .  we are not getting  but we are able to . remove only  of these  chlorides as silver . chloride that means we have two types of chloride . groups present in these molecules . The type which is present as the ionic one . can be removed by reaction with silver ion . and the type what is not present as chloride . ion cannot be removed as silver chloride . So what basically we are getting there what . Alfred Werner made that particular time he . made by these observation and he was . compared to suggest at the particular time . that the formation of complex or coordination . compounds have taken place So . whatever thing we are getting as the reaction . product of cobalt chloride with ammonia is . a new species what is forming over . there which he leveled as a complex Definitely . the situation is complex one because we are . unable to observe what is happening . over there depending upon the number of chloride . anions are getting removed from the molecule . as silver chloride So they are . complex or coordination compounds because . the coordinate bond by that time the little . bit information we can have in our hand . that how this coordinate bond can formed between . two species x and y between metal and the . ligand what we will just define . what is ligand afterwards between the cobalt . and the ammonia between the iron and the . water between the nickel and the water . molecules . So some connectivity we can have between . the species like metal salt as the corresponding . and corresponding cation and the . species like water or the ammonia So we . have in our hand the corresponding complex . or coordination compounds . And since we have the coordination compound . we must have a coordination sphere . What does it mean that we have this particular . coordinate bond and if we consider the cobalt . is forming this coordinate bond with . the nitrogen and the stoichiometry of the . molecule what we see just now that we have .  ammonia molecules and they are not . loosely attached to the molecule like our . solvent of crystallization rather they are . tightly attached to the system that means . they . are providing some amount of environment around . the cobalt centre So if we get that a particular . environment is forming by . using all these ammonia So we have  such . so we have  water molecules ammonia molecules . and we have the cobalt centre . So this particular environment which is surrounding . the cobalt ion so cobalt this is the trivalent . cobalt So this cobalt is present . as the trivalent cobalt So we get a corresponding . environment and this particular environment . we call it as corresponding . coordination environment We have the corresponding . coordination bond and we are thinking that . this is all the  ammonia . molecules are interacting with the cobalt . centre So all of them are forming this cobalt . nitrogen bond So we have  such cobalt . centers sorry this  such cobalt nitrogen . groups are there and thus we can have  cobalt . nitrogen bonds . So we have the coordination sphere  . and interestingly now we can compare how this . coordination sphere looks like that if we . just . consider just now what we are discussing . that we had cobalt as the corresponding cobalt . chloride salt and we dissolve it in water . as a solvent So if like ammonia the water . molecule can also behave like interacting . with the cobalt centre forming the same type . of cobalt oxygen bond with the trivalent cobalt . So dissolving any such salt any metal salt . whether it is a cobalt chloride salt a . nickel chloride or a copper chloride salt . we should have a similar environment which . is made up of water that is very important . observation at that particular time . So whatever metal salt we are dissolving . in a test tube in a beaker or in a round . bottom flask in a chemistry laboratory class . we . should have a corresponding coordination sphere . around the metal salt So metal will be there . as n plus and will be having large . number of water molecules whether this water . molecules we have added for making the solution . or these water molecules are . coming from the living system the living . organisms in our body So from the living . system also these water molecules will try . to . surround in the same fashion surrounding this . particular metal centre . And these water molecules having the lone . pair of electrons on these molecules as the . corresponding lone pairs on the oxygen . atom will start interacting in a similar fashion . with that of our metal centre So large number . of water molecules will be . surrounding this particular metal centre . but only few can directly interact to give . rise to the corresponding coordinate bond . and . will be responsible for giving rise to the . corresponding coordination sphere is due to . the formation of some of these direct metal . oxygen bonds . So the formation of these metal oxygen bonds . are therefore important for even the dissolution . of any metal salt in water to get . the corresponding right solution of that particular . metal salt So when we have the coordination . sphere we consider that this is . the first sphere of interaction or first sphere . of attraction between the metal and the water . or between the metal and the ammonia . molecule So we consider that in this first . coordination sphere we have the ligands So . this is the new term what we are . introducing . So afterwards in next class we will discuss . about of these ligands and what these ligands . basically mean and right now we can . consider is that which is related to something . which is basically going to bind to the metal . centre If it is the water molecule which . can bind to the metal centre then the water . will be over ligand and if it is ammonia molecule . which is going to bind to the metal . centre then ammonia will be our ligand so . which is directly bound to the central metal . So when these water molecules are . surrounding there So we now call them as . the corresponding ligands . So if they are there so ligands are basically . surrounding the metal centre through some . interaction of M L type So which is the . basic important point of this particular coordination . chemistry that whenever we have the metal . present over there we must have . the corresponding metal ligand interactions . So metal ligand interaction everywhere if . we try to dissolve the corresponding metal . in solution in water or if with the metal . is present in some biological fluid in our . body . So we have the central metal and we have . the corresponding initial binding in the first . coordination sphere So what is there in . the outer coordination sphere what we now . call as the second sphere? In the second sphere . other ions are attached to the . complex ion that means already we had this . C l minus so in the first sphere which is . forming the direct coordination to the metal . centre . So we have therefore another layer at this . particular point and these layers will give . us some information that we have already . the corresponding C l minus ions So C l . minus will be here C l minus will be here . and this C l minus will be here So this . is the . first sphere of attraction this is the second . sphere of attraction where we do not have . any cobalt chlorine bond Since this cobalt . chlorine bond is not there cobalt though it . is interacting with the ammonia molecules . but it has no interaction with C l minus . So . C l minus is present as sodium chloride and . this can be removed nicely with the reaction . of silver plus silver ion to give you this . corresponding silver chloride . So that is why for this particular formulation . when all the  ammonia groups are attached . to the cobalt centre and all the  . chloride anions are in the second sphere of . attraction we can remove all the  chlorides . and we do not have any direct cobalt . chlorine bond present in it and for this sort . of thing that means the corresponding bonding . pattern spectroscopic color and all . these thing has been identified by Alfred . Werner during this particular period and for . that particular reason he has been awarded . the Nobel Prize in chemistry in  . For his contribution in coordination theory . or theory related to develop for the identification . of different coordination complexes . or coordination compounds So exactly about .  years back the subject has been developed . and the Nobel Prize was given in .  for its recognition for understanding . of this particular species in its regular . form at that particular point . So what we have now we can summarize this . particular thing what was reacting in this . all this cases that the first case what we . see that this was the composition what we . are trying to analyze that cobalt chloride . with  ammonia molecules then we have two . other and again we have a another one which . is the fourth one So this can be considered . as the first sphere of attraction we . have  ammonium groups attached to the cobalt . and we have something where we write in square . bracket and this square . brackets tells us that within the square brackets . not only we have the cobalt but also we have . the ammonia molecules and the . stoichiometry of cobalt and ammonia is  is . to  . That means whenever we have  cobalt centre . we have  ammonia groups surrounding this . particular cobalt centre and in the . second sphere of attraction we have  chloride . anions So from this particular analogy we . just go for the second stoichiometric . product for the corresponding coordination . compound where we have  ammonia molecules . So we have  ammonia molecules . or the ligands Now we have defined them . as ligand So cobalt is surrounded by  ammonia . ligands and  C l as present as the . corresponding ligand within the coordination . sphere So this is basically a corresponding . coordination sphere where we have  N . H  and  C l and  of the C l is present . as C l minus so the nature of these two C . l groups are different . First one is forming a direct cobalt chlorine . bond which is present in the first sphere . of attraction that means the first coordination . sphere which cannot be removed by reacting . with silver ion that means silver plus but .  other C l minus is present in the second . sphere which can be removed by silver ion . as silver chloride So this particular species . is different from the first one in the same . that it has  ammonia surrounding the centre . the metal centre here one of them is not . ammonia but it is a C l that means we . have the C l group directly attaching to the . cobalt centre So for the second stoichiometry . where we have  ammonia less further . So in the same way we see that we have  . N H  groups and  C l groups and we have .  anionic chloride which can be removed . by silver ion and the last example is that . the  chloride and  ammonia that means we . have a another species which we are . writing in square bracket as  ammonia and .  C l minus . So which is the very interesting example . for all this discussions that whenever we . have this cobalt centre and now we have the . corresponding coordination sphere and this . coordination sphere we have this we are not . going to is a plane of paper we are . drawing but is a  dimensional one because . we are considering as a sphere because this . is our sphere So we should have a . spherical  dimensional arrangement of this . So spherical  dimensional arrangement of . these that means these ammonia groups as ligands . but in this particular case what we . see that we have ammonia we have ammonia . but all the  what where present as the cobalt . salt is now attaching to the cobalt . centre giving a different type of species . where less ammonia stoichiometry because now . if these three ammonia groups are close . to this cobalt centre so we have some interaction . or some cobalt nitrogen bond of  number . Similarly the chlorides are directly attaching . to the cobalt and the proof for that is the . direct proof is that if we react with silver . ion silver chloride is not formed over there . because we are unable to remove which is a . very interesting observation for that that . we do not have under mild condition the condition . should be mild that will discussed as our . classes progress that if the condition . is mild . That means simple room temperature reaction . and mere addition Just we are simply adding . drop by drop of this silver ion as a . solution of silver nitrate we are not getting . these as the corresponding precipitation of . silver chloride that means these chloride . ions is now tightly attached They are  . tightly attached to the cobalt centre So . this salt of observations for these compounds . gives . us some information\u2019s that basically we . can interpret many aspects of chemistry where . we have metal is present as the . corresponding metal ion . So many aspects of chemistry we can consider . can be explained Aspects of chemistry can . be explained as well as some . interactions in biological chemistry which . is very important because all we know very . basic thing from our early childhood that . we have blood in our system So which is . a very important species all of us should . know about blood and all of us should know . about the oxygen present because we are surviving . on oxygen as well as we are surviving on water . molecule So we will discuss . afterwards though but in this introductory . class that how we see these things that means . all we know the very basic thing is that . that contains iron . So the presence of this blood in iron and . this particular thing is that is also a fluid . So blood is present as a fluid and that fluid . is . basically giving some environment around iron . So forget about everything We have iron . is in some oxidation state and which . has some other interactions with this that . means in terms of this particular theory for . the chemistry we can see that this fluid can . start interacting like that of our first coordination . sphere in the blood and when we go for respiration . using oxygen we also see . that there is some interaction so that is . the knowledge what we can have from this study . that dioxygen molecule that means the . oxygen molecule in air when we breath basically . it goes to blood and some molecule is present . over there which can be . oxygenated due to the interaction of iron . with dioxygen . What is that? This is nothing but our hemoglobin . So by knowing this we can study the corresponding . interactions of hemoglobin . with the biological fluid that means the biological . environment as well as interaction with dioxygen . molecule and also the . interaction with the water molecule So not . only the biological system many metal compounds . whether they are present in . solution or in the solid state the metal . compounds present in the melt that means in . some molten condition or in the solid state . as . the different oxides that means the metal . oxides . So all these can be very nicely studied in . terms of the metal and their corresponding . interaction with the donor atoms And donor . atoms we have the defined as the corresponding . ligand system So they all can be identified . they all can be studied they all can . be experimentally say explained for their . corresponding studies in the form of the corresponding . coordination chemistry . So once we have all these examples for this . and we have seen that we can have the formation . of complexes and coordination . compounds So we have the transition metals . the transition metal ions are present and . during the interaction with these ligands . the formation of complexes is therefore is . a characteristic property of the transition . metals That means all the transition metals . now we are isolating this metals from the . periodic table because this cobalt and other . examples what we are giving for this . particular class they are the typical transition . metals . So we will see in our next class that what . are the transition metals how we define the . transition elements but for today we . should see that these transition metals I . have the first and for most characteristic . is that they will form complexes So if we . have . any transition metal from the periodic table . So immediately we can see in terms of their . property in terms of their behavior in . terms of their reactions that they have the . immediate property for reactions the chemical . reactions is that they will form . complex . So most easily observed is that particular . property and all these properties are also . seen when you find that metal complexes are . all in colored So metal salts are also colored . So why they are colored that will see and . how we can identify a particular metal . complex formation in a particular environment . That means one typical metal salt can be colored . in water and we when we add . ammonia the color whether can change or not . that also can give some information about . the formation of new type of complex . and this color is dependent on the nature . of the central atom and the oxidation state . and the type of the ligand So when one . metal centre is interacting with the ligand . we get the corresponding complex species and . if we have more than one such species . present in a single compound we call them . as coordination compound . That means whatever we write in the form of . a square bracket like cobalt salt and it has . a corresponding anion is balanced So . this we will call as a corresponding complex . but in some cases it can so happen that it . can have two parts and both the cationic . part and the anionic part both of them are . the complex part Here the cationic part . this is the cationic part Cationic part is . giving . us the corresponding complex species but . the anionic part is simple inorganic anion . coming from the corresponding chloride ion . But when the cationic part is a complex species . and the anionic part is also a complex species . we call them as getting a . corresponding coordination compound where . both the two parts are made up from the complex . species And we will have the . corresponding examples for that also and we . will see that in our next class as well . So in this particular case what we see that . the compound for these where we have the  . ammonia molecule surrounding the . cobalt centre we consider these as a typical . thing that we consider this as the formation . of such number of corresponding . coordination bonds and since  such new coordination . bond that means new cobalt nitrogen bonds . are formed we consider these . numbers as the corresponding coordination . number . So most of the complexes because this number . has some unique property that we will see . in our next class that why  is so . common for a spherical arrangement of ligands . surrounding the metal centre So this is . very common for many metal complexes . and coordination numbers for complex compounds . usually it can range from  to  So one . after another we can consider that . we how we can go from the most common coordination . number of  and little bit of beyond that . because for getting the   . and  coordination number we need some bigger . metal centre where large number of metal ions . can be surrounded the . corresponding metal centre . So first thing that what we are discussing . that will continue in our next class also . that we will having some monodentate ligand . that means one point of attachment to the . metal centre giving these species basically . and there is no charge So this charge on . the species and the coordination number these . two are not related to each other and we can . have this particular species where . ferrous ion can bind  water molecules that . means the coordination number is  in this . case coordination number also  but this . case it is  and the other case is also  . So we have introduced something like that . the denticity of the ligand what is ligand . and . the metal centre that we will elaborate more . in our next class . Thank you very much .  . '][u'Good evening everybody So today we will . continue our discussions what is going on . coordination chemistry and today we will . just basically specify our attention on the . definition . So how we can define a particular complex? . When we have seen in our last class that complex . formation rather is playing some . important role from materials to the live . processes and the central part of it is a . typical metal centre What we have seen that . it . can be a ferric ion; so how we consider that . coordination chemistry can be developed around . a particular metal ion and first of . that thing which will be mostly devoted to . the solution of any such metal salt This . is a very simple and basic question what . we . can ask to anybody but the answer of that . question is not so simple because whenever . we have the solution in water\u2026 So what . we find that what is happening there in water? . And from the idea of forming not only  iron . oxygen bond but  iron oxygen bond like this . and where we can have first sphere . of attraction This is forming from one such . lone pair of electron available on the water . molecule So we have six such these . thing and over all charge on this but this . is a very standard and very well known; and . also a very complex question related to the . complex chemistry is that whether this particular . species which will consider as the hexa aqua . ferric ion will exist in a solution . of water at neutral p H say p H  . And some more complex thing can happen afterwards . if this water when coordinated to iron center . and this iron is in plus  . oxidation state and it is sharing That means . the electron density from this particular . oxygen is pushed towards the vacant orbital . of iron and the p k a basically the p k a . of this O H is changing And this particular . p k a value is such that it is going to towards . some position where we can consider that . this bound water molecules These bound water . molecules to ferric ion are acidic So . if they are acidic what will happen? That . we can expect some amount of release of the . proton so if we consider that  of the . proton will be released from  such F e O . H to bond so we will get at least F e O . H bond . That means instead of aqua coordination we . have the hydroxido coordination And remaining .  H  O will be there as water . molecule and we have release of  proton . so charged been utilized at one point so . this will be  plus So if this particular . situation continues for removal of more number . of H plus that means removal of more protons . at one particular stage where we . have so we have two step of those proton . releases We have F e O H whole  H  O whole .  as a neutral species and which . basically we can consider as the precipitation . of ferric hydroxide . So this particular condition we will call . as precipitation of ferric hydroxide So . this basically tells us some important thing . that . when we go for the dissolution of ferric chloride . salt So whether the dissolution of ferric . chloride in a solution where water is . present at p H  is possible or not? Because . if this particular removal of proton is taking . place will end up with not a solution of . ferric chloride what a solution of ferric . hydroxide So what is happening therefore . that hydrolysis of this particular complex . so . hydrolysis of these aqua complex is taking . place and we are not getting a typical ferric . chloride solution in a step . So to get a typical ferric chloride solution . we should add that means the hydrolysis of . water molecule bound to the iron center . the ferric center can be prevented if we . add few drops of dilute acid So acid is . required to stop the hydrolysis so that is . there . And in a next step what we get that during . the precipitation of ferric hydroxide what . we all know that some amount of this . during removal of more water and condensation . That means if at this particular point condensation . can take place between these . ferric hydroxide with bound water molecules . and iron iron bond That means if we can have . something where F e O H F e . network is forming and will end up with species . like F e  O  or F e  O  . So ferric hydride or any other such type . of mineral like systems or the molecules can . be formed there and we can consider this . step as mineralization So in our body also . in any system wherever we are talking the . dissolution of iron iron in the system iron . in the living system also And if iron is . ultimately stored so iron  . storage is possible in our body when we get . iron from the food . material And if iron intake is surplus which . is not immediately required completely for . the production of hemoglobin and . mioglobin molecules access iron can be stored . in this fashion and the mineralization can . take place and this particular process . will call it as bio mineralization And one . such important molecule in our body is there . which is the ferritin molecule . So whatever iron we have in living system . or in any other reaction chemistry also and . the if we cannot control the p H and the . p . H is at certain point and iron is not in . the solution which is not utilised for the . synthesis of hemoglobin and mioglobin molecule . but can be stored as ferritin where more . and more this F e O H O H type of binding . Sometime we can have when  hydroxide . group is attached to  iron center This particular . O H can have again a different p k value . compared to the hydroxido ion which . is not bound to the iron centre and it can . also go for dissociation of proton making . this hydroxido ion to oxido ion . So when it is forming oxido ion so the code . can also be formed from a new hydroxido and . new oxido bridge network This is a . mineral like network which can be formed . in ferritin molecule So what we see from . this particular ss making solution . So what we have? We have certain amount of . any salt so this is a typical salt and if . the nature of this salt we know it can be . a . nickel salt So if this salt is in our hand . and we try to make some solutions like that . of our making iron solution So when we . take this particular salt so it is not a . typical iron salt or copper salt or any other . metal salt but it is colored So colored . salts we . all know what is particular salt can be colored . it cannot be potassium chloride it cannot . be sodium chloride so definitely it is a . typical salt which can give rise to the colored . to our system . And when we simply dissolve it in water like . dissolution of ferric chloride it is also . not ferric chloride the colored also tells . us . that this is not ferric chloride also So . if we just try to dissolve it in water immediately . we get a typical solution and the solution . has a characteristic color If we are able . to analyze the color of this species we should . be able to tell what is forming over there . inside this particular test tube So this . is basically a nickel salt so nickel sulphate . or nickel chloride is there in our hand and . when . we dissolve it in water it gives like iron . the hexa aqua nickels chloride or sulphate . So if it is a nickel chloride it gives hexa . aqua nickel chloride salt as a complex or . if it is a nickel sulphate we will also end . up . with hexa aqua nickel sulphate complex So . simple taking any salt in a test tube and . addition of water can give rise to our . coordination complex So complexation is . so easy to have but we sometime forget to . write in this particular fashion when we . are . considering that nickel is doing some central . role in some catalytic reaction in some other . biological reaction that the first . species what is forming over there is the . hexa aqua nickel  plus . And this particular thing that means the color . change is nothing but from this particular . complex we can have this complex we . can have this complex and we can have this . complex So when we add nickel hexa aqua . and some H C l to it or some potassium . chloride so that means supply of C L minus . So if we have hexa aqua nickel  plus cat . ion has the corresponding complex and we add . simple H C l is also sufficient So H C l . is providing the ligand as C L minus and the . nature of this particular ligand is only giving . rise to  C L minus groups around the . nickel centre We get the corresponding tetra . chloro complex So the substitution of these . by this chloride anion is possible and . we get some one particular geometry to the . other particular geometry It is very easy . to make also is not only true for nickel . but . it is also true for the cobalt or many other . metal ions where supply of these C L minus . to any water solution of the salt can give . rise to the corresponding tetra chloro complex . And one interesting aspect of this is that . the color of the species will immediately . change from the original color So the . associated reaction condition can be monitored . by looking at the change in color for the . reaction Why the change in the color is . taking place? Because the C L minus is one . after another substituting all  water molecules . around this nickel centre and also we . are not getting any such species in this particular . case where we have  water molecules and .  are the substituted one that means . this one So in this particular condition . in this very simple condition we are not getting . any complex of this type but the  C L . minus can substitute  water molecules together . though in a stepwise manner but the ultimate . product of the reaction will only . be the tetra chloro complex not this tetra . aqua di chloro species . So this particular s species is forming from . a one particular typical color of this is . that green to a olive green color Similarly . if . we add ammonia to this water complex this . aqua complex we get the blue coloration It . is also true when we add copper sulphate . solution and ammonia we get also a royal . blue color due to the formation of tetra amine . complex of copper Similarly here also . addition of ammonia molecules will replace . all the  water molecules coordinated to the . nickel centre by changing its color from . green to blue And another interesting reaction . is also this another different type of ligand . will also go for characterizing and . defining those ligands also This is a typical . ligand abbreviated as ethylene diamine it . is unlike this ammonia this is diamine form . and is organic ligand . So organic ethylene diamine ligand when bound . to the nickel centre by replacing  water . molecules will give rise to the . formation of another species another complex . species where three such ligands are required . to fulfill its first coordination sphere . and the color is changing to violet So once . we know this four reactions starting from . the dissolution of solid nickel salt we . can . get this particular one If we look at all . the  colors we should be able to tell the .  different colors nicely And if we can measure . the corresponding electronic spectrum that . we will see that the most important condition . most physical characterization for . knowing the complex formation is by measuring . the corresponding electronic spectra of these . solutions . So by knowing these color basically and it . is corresponding electronic spectra and we . will slowly expose to that for knowing the . corresponding lambda maximum That means the . electronic absorption spectra and the corresponding . coefficient of absorption . the molar absorptivity All will tell us that . what type of electronic transition is take . place for changing one color to the other . Right now we should keep in our mind that . the different colors basically and we should . be able to know what particular type of . complex is forming within the solution So . we should know the four colors and we should . know the four complexes forming . over there . So why we are talking all this things related . to some of this species? So we will have . the entire periodic table and for this . particular class that means the coordination . chemistry classes we will just focus our attention . on the first series of this transition . metals And we have just started our discussion . in this second class of iron of nickel and . little bit of copper So what are they? . They are the transition metal ions and they . have some typical electronic configurations . Due to that particular electronic . configurations we have certain number of . unpaired electrons present in say bivalent . nickel or trivalent iron or bivalent or . tetravalent manganese . Those electrons are responsible for their . color even for the very simple species what . is forming in water And if we consider this . entire series from this one this is not T . l this is titanium Titanium to copper so . this titanium to copper series will consider . as the . first transition series elements or  d metal . ions So when they are responsible for complexation . we will consider as the  d . metal complexes and the next series from zirconium . to silver we will consider them as the  d . metal complexes and from . hafnium to gold we can consider them as the .  d metal complexes . We will write now we will take out all these . green colored green bordered this metal ions . like scandium and zinc yttrium and . cadmium and lanthanum and mercury because . in particular oxidation state this candium . as well as this zinc will not have any . unpaired electron so that by definition we . cannot consider them in this ionic form That . means in some oxidation state bivalent . or trivalent as containing unpaired electrons . in the d levels or the d orbital\u2019s . So basic definition we can consider for these . transition elements which are responsible . for the formation of metal complexes are . that they should have partly filled d or f . shells So when these are f shells we are . considering these as the corresponding . lanthanides That means cerium to lutetium . but when we have the d elements we consider . them as the transition metals . So how we can define the d block elements? . So we have like this  d  d and  d and . they are basically positioned at   and .  . series of periods So this is first this . is second this is third therefore this . line this horizontal line belongs to forth . period this is . fifth period and the sixth period So fourth . fifth and sixth periods will be considered . as the corresponding elements of this . particular block Each series has  elements . because we have  d orbital\u2019s and the  . d levels we are talking about . When  d levels are filled by  electrons . each  into  that means  electrons will . be there and as a result we can have  . elements in one particular series And their . chemistry is different from the other elements . so that is very important to know that . whenever we talk about their chemistry that . means when we consider about the chemistry . of manganese . If we consider the adjacent element as iron . then the next adjacent is cobalt so manganese . iron cobalt nickel and copper So . what we can see that their chemistry is completely . different So if we have certain sorts of . these metals that means salt of . manganese salt of iron salt of cobalt salt . of nickel and salt of copper And if we just . consider the simple metal salts that means . if we just consider that we have a metal salt . like copper sulphate and another metal salt . just now we have discussed as  . molecules of water crystallization . So when we are dissolving in water we have . seen just now dissolving in water and that . means water will first coordinate with . them and then addition of ammonia Here also . water first then ammonia what will happen . there? Therefore that this nickel  . will . form the hexa amine complex and this adjacent . one that means the copper  . will form tetra amine complex So they are . the . adjacent elements their salts are almost . similar but when they are reacting with water . followed by ammonia as ligands Their . ultimate products are different One is forming . hexa amine another is forming tetra amine . complex and their colors are also little . bit different . So in terms of only the complex formation . so the complex formation ability are different . So depending upon the nature of the . metal ion that means the copper is behaving . differently with respect to this particular . nickel though they are two adjacent . transition metal ions So their chemistry . is therefore different So in terms of the . complexes in reaction they form different . complexes related to the metal ion special . electronic configurations are important and . differences within a group in the d block . are less sharp than in the s and p block . So within one particular group the character . for the metal ions are not very much different . because we are going from one . particular system that means d  to d  to . d  to d  to d  we are getting this particular . configurations within the filling up of . only the d blocks corresponding orbital\u2019s . Similarities across a period are greater . so across the period there similarities there . complexation reaction their other reactivity . of the metal complexes are very much . So why this transition metal ions have been . chosen to get the corresponding metal complexes . because they have some unique . properties? First we have a already seen that . when you dissolve it in water molecule they . always produce a colored solution And . also sometimes they give rise the variable . oxidation states which is very important . That means whenever we have certain metal . centre that in our previous class what we . have seen that if we have cobaltus . chloride as a solid cobalt chloride solid . is in our hand and if we just dissolve it . in water and then ammonia is added and air . is . passed That means bubbling of air within . the solution will result what? Will result . a typical metal complex and the complex is . nothing but hexa amine cobalt  chloride . So what we have basically? We have this particular . one where cobalt is present in plus .  oxidation state but this complex is forming . a corresponding compound which is in the . trivalent state . So what we see their dissolution of any such . chloride salt like nickel chloride ferric . chloride and copper chloride this will give . you immediately during the dissolution in . water as the corresponding aqua complex And . when in presence of ammonia that . means we put ammonia we change the surrounding . of this particular environment from water . to ammonia and we pass air Air . pass is nothing but we just passing oxygen . present in air which is a typical oxidant . So these oxidant is responsible for the . oxidation of cobalt  cobalt  and this is . much more stable because we will not be able . to get the corresponding bivalent version . of this complex . So the variable valiancy that means in one . case the aqua complex is stabilized in particular . water environment and another case . the amine complex is stabilized in the trivalent . oxidation state So we get the variable oxidation . state that means plus  that . means the cobaltous state and the plus  . the cobaltic state can be achieved by simple . manipulation And we can also study a very . important reaction related to these variable . oxidation state that means the electron transfer . reaction The corresponding electron . transfer reaction is also very important . So we get the variable oxidation states within . these metal complexes . Why we get such thing? That means the colored . compounds as well as a variable oxidation . states because we can have the . presence of inner incomplete d sub shells . So when we have a typical electronic configuration . that means the cobalt in  d  so . we have the cobalt  where we have  d  electronic . configuration and cobalt  is  d  So we . have  d orbital\u2019s and in the first . case the d orbital\u2019s can have  electrons . and in other case the d orbital\u2019s can have .  electrons But the maximum capacity of . d . electrons to be present within the  orbital\u2019s . are  so the occupancy in this form that . means at d  level it is partly filled So . partly filled d orbital\u2019s can be oxidized . to a configuration where it is d  because . if this particular configuration can have . some . extra stability . So oxidation is possible from cobalt  to . cobalt  and for this particular oxidation . the corresponding standard electro potential . is . also to be known us So not only the change . in the oxidation state the variable oxidation . states availability for metal complexes . but also we can measure the corresponding . susceptibility the thermodynamic reaction . drive Drive for the oxidation reaction can . also be monitored can also be measured for . the measurement of the different e g o values . of these complexes which can . ultimately give you certain things where . we can consider the electron transfer behavior . in any metal bearing system So metal is . the central part where we can consider the . electron transfer So electrons from both . inner d sub shell and outer s sub shell can . be . involved in compound formation . So during the compound formation if the s . sub shell electrons are available it can . form bonds where we can have the . corresponding complexes of say nickel in  . oxidation state So s sub shell can be utilized . for the involvement of the compound . formation like tetra carbonyl nickel where . carbon monoxide is the ligand which is forming . with the nickel in  oxidation state or . the other d sub shell electrons where oxidation . has been taken place and the  s electron . has been lost for the formation of nickel . in plus  oxidation state . So not that all d block elements are incomplete . d shell sub shell that is why we have excluded . scandium and zinc from the list . because zinc has an electronic configuration . of argon  d  It has not having some incomplete . d level that is why we are not . considering zinc in plus  oxidation state . that means bivalent zinc as a typical transition . metal ion At the same time scandium in . the trivalent state also as only electronic . configuration of argon so it is has argon . like electronic configuration it has no d . electron so anything related to d electron . property that means the complex formation . the color of the compounds the variable . oxidation state The magnetic movement will . also not be associated with zinc as well as . scandium So from the left of the series . and on the right of the series we can exclude . zinc and scandium . So a transition metal what can be defined . as an element which forms at least  ion . with a partially filled sub shell of d electrons . That means at least it can have one oxidation . state like that of our copper . When we have copper in bivalent oxidation . state what we see that the corresponding . electronic configuration is  d  so at least .  oxidation state is available for the formation . of a species like  d  We can consider that . copper as a transition metal ion . because it has partially filled d level But . if we have the copper in cupper state which . has an electronic configuration similar to . that of our zinc  plus which is not partially . filled So it  . cannot consider this particular species immediately . based on the number . of electrons present in the d level as a transition . metal electron configuration because it is . filled . So at least if we can have one oxidation . state which has a partly filled d level we . can consider this as the transition metal . So in . period four only titanium to copper at\u2026 . Therefore we can consider as the transition . metal ions And when we are forming the . corresponding ion the s electrons having lower . in energy so for the bivalent species formation . the s electrons are lost first then . the d block electrons starting losing from . the system . So if we just simply look at the corresponding . nature of the metals which is very important . So from scandium to titanium to . vanadium chromium manganese iron cobalt . nickel copper zinc so all  elements of . the first series what we are discussing is . there For the formation of the corresponding . ionic form that means trivalent scandium and . bivalent zinc we do not have any . electronic configuration where d electrons . are present In this particular case and all . the d electrons are filled in the bivalent . zinc . case So we will not consider in the ionic . form within the list of transition metals . So from titanium to vanadium we have the . different forms of these granules of these . metals but when they are forming their corresponding . salts which are very important . So instead of titanium if we just talk about . the corresponding salt that means the titanium . chloride . Instead of talking in terms of the corresponding . nickel we can talk in terms of the corresponding . salt as nickel chloride or nickel . sulphate Similarly cobalt chloride or cobalt . sulphate so what is happening there? How . we make these salts nicely from these . individual corresponding metal in this corresponding . elemental form is that when we dissolve these . these metals that means the . copper If the copper is reacted with nitric . acid and depending upon the different condition . of these acid whether it is . concentrated or dilute hot or cold we have . the corresponding reactions of the different . path ways but ultimately what we will be . getting from their is the copper  nitrate . salt . So once we have the copper two nitrate salt . we can crystallize it also from the medium . and we can get the corresponding . crystalline copper nitrate salts And in then . next step is\u2026 Therefore we can dissolve . this copper nitrate salt in water where we . find that dissolution of copper nitrate in . water is responsible for the formation of . the corresponding complex as the tetra aqua . copper  nitrate So all  water molecules . will come which coordinate to the copper . centre And the nitrate as the anion which . is . forming with that particular salt is coming . from the nitric acid will present in the . outer coordination sphere that means second . sphere of attraction of the corresponding . metal complex . So these are the list for the corresponding . metal salts and if we go from those metal . salts to the corresponding metal compounds . that will see how they are forming but before . that if we just simply look at one more example . where how the color can give . some idea to us . And if we can have so here is that is the . complex species in some different form and . which we often encounter That means the . aqueous oxo anions of transition elements . so when we have the manganese chloride the . manganese salt present or manganous . sulphate and manganous sulphate when dissolve . in in water we get a very light pink solution . And when these are oxidised to . manganate or to permanganate the color is . changing from pink to green light pink to . green and then again to dark pink So this . particular color change is basically due to . the formation of the permanganate anion so . it is in plus  oxidation state It is in . plus  . oxidation state and it is in plus  oxidation . state . So as we change the corresponding oxidation . states we are also changing the corresponding . energy required for the . corresponding absorption of radiation to . see the solution colored in its corresponding . complimentary form Similar thing is also . known for the corresponding solution of venadate . when venadate is dissolved in in water sodium . venadate or ammonium . venadate Similarly dichromate and permanganate . this is the permanganate the same permanganate . is giving a different solution . colored to us . So what we see that the different compounds . from the different metal salts and we have . seen the nature of these typical . compounds And what we see here in this particular . slide that we have seen earlier the different . condition or the nature of the . different metals when we go for the corresponding . salts and some of the salts can be simple . oxide only So scandium oxide which . is typically white in color and this particular . scandium oxide in this particular form they . are not giving any typical color but is . Some time they are very light in color . Similarly titanium  oxide T i O  the root . root I So titanium  plus which will also . not have any characteristic color to that . but when we go for the corresponding chromium . or vanadium salt This is vanadis sulphate . di hydrate which is colored sodium . chromate is also colored Then manganese two . chloride manganese  chloride tetra hydrate . which is has a very light color light . pink in color light purple in color in solution . So this color is very difficult to see when . we dissolve in in water Then is strongly . colored species like potassium ferrous cyanide . cobalt chloride nickel  hexa hydrate What . we have just seen the dissolution of . the corresponding nickel salt and the addition . of some other reagents to change the corresponding . color . This is copper  sulphate penta hydrate when . we dissolve it in water and add ammonia we . get a different color and zinc to . sulphate hecta hydrate which has no color . which is colorless which is out of the list . of the transition metals . So this particular bright colors we get for . these two species also That means this is . the chromate and chromate is typically bright . yellow in color and these were originally . initially when we do not know The all other . colored species we use these as very good . pigment Similarly this is dichromate this . is very useful analytical reagent for oxidation . reaction because is a very strong . oxidizing reagent This is the mild oxidizing . agent and interestingly this binding of this . chromium with  oxide anions O  minus . giving rise to some species which is C r . O   minus and you have  chromium oxygen . bonds . So these oxide anions basically forming the . corresponding complexation reaction with that . of our chromium and chromium is in . plus  oxidation state and this plus  oxidation . state basically is stabilized only in a environment . where  such oxide anions are . present But in some acid based reaction this . two chromate anions in acidic condition can . condense to form the dichromate anion . and this dichromate anion is still a strong . oxidizing agent But with the removal of one . water molecule in presence of two protons . we have a situation where two tetrahedral . unit . This is the tetrahedral fagment of chromate .  tetrahedral fagments are attached to each . other And this is a typical example is a . very basic example where we see that a complex . coordination anion is forms oxoanions is . formed where we have a species of . binuclear motif That means two chromium centers . are present over there . So if we just down the most of these oxidation . states that means what are the possible oxidation . states and what we can deal So . it is a very big list for that When we have . this manganese so manganese can have all . possible oxidation states That means the . possible oxidation states if we can achieve . by means of given some environment on the . metal centre we can consider that we . can have a situation where variable balance . is possible And manganese can be stabilized . from plus  plus  plus  to plus  . oxidation state . What we have just seen that manganese in . manganous plus  chloride can be oxidized . to manganate anion through some . intermediate of M n O  which we get in pyrolusite . in nature Nature is providing this particular . manganese as the pyrolusite the . mineral in plus  oxidation state and ultimately . to the most oxidized form like chromate and . dichromate as permanganate . Similarly chromium can go up to plus  oxidation . state In all these highest possible oxidation . states that means titanium in  plus . vanadium in plus  chromium in plus  and . manganese is plus   we do not have any . number of unpaired electron in the d . levels . That means the d levels are empty and we are . having a situation where we can consider them . as a d  system But still that d  . system can have a complex species because . some strong electron donating anions are attached . to them They basically feed up . with some electron density to the empty orbital\u2019s . of the metal centers So that is why though . this is highest possible oxidation . states are possible to achieve Similarly . iron in some condition is very uncommon to . reach up to an oxidation state of plus  . In . case of cobalt we can go to up to plus  . So again is a very symmetrical arrangement . from here titanium to manganese at plus  . and then again go down to nickel and . copper to plus  oxidation state These  . in yellow color we are excluding from the . list of transition metal ions as plus  in . the . case of scandium and zinc in plus  oxidation . state where we have also no unpaired electron . So in any oxidation state we cannot have . a d  at least electronic configuration So . during the formation of these corresponding . complexes if we consider the Lewis acid as . the metal centre which is our center of coordination\u2026 . So if we have M n plus and if it can have . at least  unpaired electron or few unpaired . electrons and if it belongs to the first . transition series with an electronic configuration . of say  d n and it is already having some . positive charge in it So it is basically . an electron greedy so this particular centre . can function as a Lewis acid So the centre . for forming the corresponding . coordination bond or the coordination complex . they are always Lewis acid And is surrounded . by some amount of bases when . the base is the water molecule we have the . corresponding aqua complex . And these bases that means these particular . water molecules we consider as ligands they . can be simple molecules like water or . ions like hydroxide ions or oxide ions covalently . bonded to the metal ion in the complex So . just now we have seen that if we . have the chromate the tetrahedral chromate . complex where O O O O  oxide anions are . there And overall we have a charge . of  minus because we have a centre of chromium . as in the plus  oxidation state So this . is a  d  situation we do not have any . electron in it but these are highly charged . These O minus oxide anions so these oxide . anions are now functioning as good . ligand . And these ligands are basically our bases . so they put electron density to the corresponding . acidic centre So the centre the . metal ion centre is acidic in nature and the . bases will push the electron density to the . centre and as a result we have the strong . chromium oxygen bond And these particular . bonds can stabilize this particular species . so all these oxo anions are therefore . stabilized in this particular fashion So . next day we will see how we can change? How . we can define other ligands also and how . they are going to bind to the metal center . and change the corresponding property of the . transition metal ion? . Thank you very much .  . '][u'Good evening everybody So today we will . simply start our discussion on ligands; and . in this situation what we have seen so far . that if we have metal or anything like metal . is present in solution which can interact . with the ligand giving rise to a typical . complex species So what are these different . types of ligands we can have in our hand and . which we have seen that it can be the . simple water molecule to the gaseous oxygen . to the most toxic gas is carbon monoxide . So all these that means if we just simply . talk the interaction of the water molecule . the dioxygen molecule or the C O molecule . with that of the metal centre and if they . interact with the metal centre and can modify . the properties of the metal centre as well . as their own properties then we can consider . that these species are behaving as a ligand . when they are surrounding the typical . metal species . So in this class we will see about the different . classification of the ligands How we classify . most of the ligands depending upon . their typical nature of binding to the metal . centre So historically when people first . started talking on these and leveling all . these . the term ligand was first introduced in terms . of the corresponding binding property of any . molecular species or ionic species and . it was Alfred Stock who introduced in  . in relation to silicon chemistry . So silicon is not considered as a typical . metal centre but still we know that that . naturally produced different silicates and . all . other silicon bearing species are there so . silicon if we consider is the central element . where silicon is interacting with some other . species which we can considered as l then . these are termed at this time as they are . as the typical ligand So this we are discussing . for the last two classes that if we have the . cobalt centre in our hand and initially when . cobalt species is present in water we have .  water molecules surrounding this cobalt . and it has a typical geometry that we will . discuss shortly that what type of environment . we can have . So first sphere of attraction what we have . seen the first coordination sphere of attraction . is made of  ammonia molecules . surrounding this cobalt centre and if we see . from this  dimensional figure is a  dimensional . picture though it is drawn in plane . paper but we see some of the bonds are facing . towards the observer and some of the bonds . are facing back side of this plane So . these these two ammonia which is a bold bonds . with cobalt nitrogen bold bonds and the ammonia . molecules are also bigger in . size . So they are above the plane of the paper . and these two are below the plane and since . it is not balancing any charge these . ammonia molecules are behaving as a ligand . since they are binding the cobalt centre . So they are basically considered as good . ligand and they are only attaching to the . cobalt centre from one point that is why they . are termed as monodentate ligand and . when the full coordination sphere is filled . and charge is there  plus charge for the . cobalt centre which is getting utilized by . the . presence of  chloride anions outside the . coordination sphere . So what we see that these ligands we can . consider as monodentate ligands So this . is basically one type of classification that . what are those monodentate ligands? So monodentate . ligands are those ligands where we have one . point of attachment to the . metal centre So water molecules these chlorides . these bromides and other halides if they only . attaching to the metal centre . through one point then they are termed as . good monodentate ligands . So not only metal but also metal likes elements . like metalloids when they are bound to ligands . we see that in virtually all . circumstances when metal is in then free form . as M N plus or metalloid also there in the . free form they always try to bind the . ligands Even we have seen that when only . water molecule is present in the solution . in the reaction vessel or in some natural . environment in biological systems these metal . centers or metalloid centers will interact . with these water molecules . Also they can interact when the available . group is not water molecule but a dioxygen . molecule So metal can also interact with . the dioxygen molecule and dioxygen molecule . can function as a good ligand Similarly . the toxic carbon monoxide gas which is a . gaseous species this can also interact to . the metal centre as a monodentate ligand . So what we know  . that tetra carbonyl nickel species where the . nickel is in  oxidation state So we have . nickel in  oxidation . state and this carbon monoxide gas can also . function as a good monodentate ligand So . starting from water to dioxygen to carbon . monoxide all of them can function as a monodentate . ligand . So when we see that these are basically also . reviewed in this particular reference of polyhedron . in of  so their all types of . ligands have been classified . And we can see that when the ligands are present . in the complex what they do they do basically . control the reactivity of the . central atom If the central atom is a metal . they will control the reactivity pattern of . the central atom If the reactivity pattern . of . the corresponding central atom is the metalloid . they can also control So when one particular . ligand centre it can control the . reactivity of one metal centre if it is iron . it can control the iron centre in some form . if it is nickel it will control the . corresponding reactivity pattern of the nickel . centre in a different way Also it can control . the corresponding ligand substitution . rates So when we consider that one ligand . is present with the metal centre it can be . substituted by the other ligand . So if we have M L and it can be M L  also . that means  ligands surrounding the metal . centre and if this is reacting with M L . prime and L is substituted by L prime then . we call it as a typical ligand substitution . reaction where the ligand L has been . substituted by ligand L prime and in both . these two cases the nature of the ligand basically . what type of ligand we have as L and . L prime they will control the corresponding . substitution reaction So the role of ligand . is important  . for this particular substitution . reaction and rate of the substitution reaction . is also very important and in some other cases . not only the substitution but also we . can talk about the electron transfer which . is guided by the nature of the ligand attached . to the metal centre . Then the reactivity of the ligand it is themselves . that means when the ligand substitution is . taking place we also find that the . bound ligand which is present sometime the . big molecule organic molecule is attached . to the metal centre and if metal is . performing some catalytic role and if we can . perform some reaction on this bound ligand . we see the reactivity of the ligand that . means the reactivity of the organic molecule . can also be dependent on the nature of the . organic molecule that means the nature . of the ligand system as well as the corresponding . electron transfer reaction . So in different areas of this coordination . chemistry what type of ligand we are basically . selecting is important It is important or . it . is critical to consider these when we try . to use their choice for practical purposes . So when we talk in terms of the corresponding . bioinorganic chemistry that means the biocoordination . chemistry that means we want to know the corresponding . nature of this . metal centre what is present in all biologically . important molecules . Such that in the area of this bioinorganic . chemistry we all know that iron is present . in our blood and this iron is bound to a . porphyrin ligand which is a different type . of ligand will come for the classification . of that ligand also So when this is there . so . this the abbreviated form of the porphyrin . so we have iron porphyrin complex  . and it has two other points of attachments . also . And this particular one this ligand is synthesized . in our body so it has some biosynthetic pathway . of the synthesis So we get this . porphyrin molecule which is attaching to the . iron centre . So the role of this ligand is very important . role of this porphyrin ligand is important . and is also very much specific because the . different types of porphyrin molecules are . there having different peripheral substitutions . from here from here and from here . And for this iron porphyrin complex which . is present in blood as heme is typically synthesized . in our body and it has only that . particular role of oxygenation So it can . oxygenate from this particular point and this . particular side is bound to nitrogen of the . ring so this particular synthesis of this . porphyrin only is important for the formation . of blood and it is corresponding reactions . with dioxygen molecule . So the second is the corresponding molecules . which are involved in medicinal chemistry . so some good medicines we can have . some drug molecules are important in our hand . which basically taking the corresponding important . role of the metal centre to . different ligand system One such example . is well known to us the basically the cancer . drug which is cisplatin which is nothing . but a platinum best metal complex Similarly . in homogeneous catalysis so all different . types of an important catalytic reactions . we can have and these catalytic reactions . are most of the cases are controlled by the . metal centre . So when catalysis is on the metal centre . is bound to several ligand system and those . ligands also play some important role for . a . particular type of reaction which is giving . us the corresponding reaction which is catalyzed . and lastly the environmental . chemistry So if metal dependent environmental . chemistry is available so metal ions are also . play some important role in . controlling the environment Suppose it can . react with the gaseous molecules it can react . with some molecules some deadly . molecules present in water molecules the . methyl radical also forming the methyl mercury . compounds and some other type of . important compounds . So wherever the metalloids present particularly . from the industry the industrially effluents . large amount of cadmium large . amount of zinc and large amount of mercury . is people are dumping on the river or the . ocean water and some groups like these . methyl groups or all other important groups . are their which can immediately go and bind . to the metal centre and they are . ultimately contaminating the aquatic life . Because the aquatic life the fishes and all . other species do consume all these deadly . and . poisonous material and through that food chain . the through that food cycle it also comes . to the human being also and human . being also by consuming those material the . fishes they are also poisoned by these metal . ions which are originally forming the . metal complex . So broadly speaking if we just considered . these ligands so how they can classify broadly . in terms of their not denticity but also . their charge So if there is no charge as . we have seen just now that if we have only . water molecule or only ammonia molecule . there is no charge So those are considered . as the neutral ligand their size how big . they are depending upon the donor atoms . such that the donor atom can vary from nitrogen . to oxygen to sulphur to phosphorous . So depending upon the donor atoms and also . if it is chelating one that means it has  . binding points and the size of the ring is . also . important Then the identity of the coordinating . atoms what type of coordinating atom we can . have the number of electrons . donated to the metal through this ligands . that means how many bonds they are forming . with the metal centre whether we are . forming a single bond or a double bond or . a triple bond to the metal centre And sometime . the steric bulk this bulk is not related . to the size of the atom from oxygen to nitrogen . to sulphur but this bulk is related to the . corresponding steric bulk on the ligand . and is indicated by its cone angle . In some catalytic reactions we see one such . good ligand is triphenyl phosphine So phosphorous . is there and we can have like . ammonia three phenyl rings attached to this . phosphorous And the phosphorous lone pair . which is their which is being donated to . the metal centre say most catalytically important . metal ion is the rhodium So if the rhodium . phosphine bond is formed and in a . square planer environment So is a four coordinated . square planer one and sometime this is in . plus  oxidation state So this . particular one that means the reactivity of . these sides particularly the transposition . of this phosphine side and two other positions . so we can have the substrate  . and other position also reagent . And we can talk in terms of and it has some . other groups attached to this rhodium side . and these substrate and reagent can react . as but the reactivity pattern will be typically . controlled by the corresponding phosphine . group because this can also be occupied . by another phosphine ligand also So this . particular cone this  dimensional cone is . forming  . and this angle is known as the theta . which is Tolman\u2019s cone angle . So if we vary from one system to the other . so only within the phosphine so we can have . large amount of substitutions by getting . P M e  by getting P E t  and all So we . can have different this cone angle phosphine . cone angle So this particular one will . have some reactivity when we substitute these . by trimethyl phosphine and when trimethyl . phosphine is substituted by triethyl . phosphine we have different cone angle and . the reactivity pattern on the rhodium centre . will also be different . So in terms of the chelation what we see . that if we have the number of donor atoms . from one point to the other So just now . what we have seen so the monodentate ligand . will be not considered as the corresponding . chelating ligand it is out of this . particular list So like water like ammonia . like hydroxide ion like sulfide ion and all . they belong to this particular class but . from bidentate to polydentate system we have . more than  point of attachment So if we . have  points of attachment we get as a . bidentate ligand like ethylene diamine . We can also a tridentate ligand because most . useful tridentate ligands are known Then . we can have the tetradentate ligand as  . points of attachment hexadentate ligand as .  points of attachment and these ligands can . also be termed in terms of polydentate . when we have  or more donor atoms within . the one ligand system So they basically . go for coordination to one particular metal . centre from two different points if this is . one particular donor atom and this is another . donor atom and in between if we have no . other donor atom present then we consider . this as a bidentate chelating ligand . So here we have a big list of all these starting . from the monodentate one to the polydentate . groups So if we simply consider one . after another which is a very important thing . to know because already we have seen the ammine . one and these are all . monodentate one So this ammine giving us . the corresponding coordination through this . rate bio atom that means the nitrogen . then methyl ammine we can have where we can . have the coordination through nitrogen then . fluoro chloro bromo and iodo . groups are there So we can have all these . groups but the sizes are different from fluoride . to iodide but they only function as . monodentate ligand . Similarly this nitric oxide gas or the carbon . monoxide gas these are the two gases also . So nitric oxide and carbon monoxide can . also function as a good monodentate ligand . and from water molecule if we have deprotonation . we get the hydroxo group and . hydroxido coordination we can have Then N . O  minus so sodium nitrite if we supply to . the system sodium nitrite if we supply . this can bind to the metal ion through nitrogen . or through oxygen So the corresponding complexes . will considered as nitrito and . a nitrito is two words nitrite oxygen and . nitrito nitrogen then we can have the cyano . function the cyano coordination . These are the two other neutral groups we . can have the pyridine and if we have more . than one pyridine groups we get bipyridine . antapyridine Similarly the pseudo halide . like thiocyanate thiocyanate can bind through . nitrogen and through sulphur So this is . thiocyanate and through nitrogen we call as . isothiocyanato or we consider like this type . of binding if we just specifically mention . that which particular atom is utilised for . binding we consider this as thiocyanato nitrogen . the other will be thiocyanateo sulphur . Then sulfato is also is binding through this . oxygen of the sulfato group and when one of . these oxygen is substituted by sulphur we . know that the corresponding anion is known . as thiosulphate and thiosulfato is also a . very good monodentate ligand but the . charges are all different So starting from . neutral monodentate ligand to monodentate . ligand So to this monodentate by negative . ligand we can have where we have  negative . charges . So when the question of polydentate ligand . comes to our mind we see that when it is bidentate . one we have  nitrogen donor . atoms from the ethylene back bone and  of . them are ammine function So it is ethylene . diamine So ethylene diamine can bind . through this nitrogen to the metal centre . and this nitrogen to the other metal centre . Similarly oxalato anion is also binding . through  oxygen\u2019s of the oxalate group . and this oxalate group is nothing but\u2026 . So  negative charges So this particular . group has  negative charges and this is then . going and bind to the corresponding metal . oxalato complex The way we determine very . easily the calcium the calcium  plus is . a very useful species for binding that as . the . corresponding calcium oxalate which is a very . useful dynamitic reagent because if we have . in a solution unknown amount of . calcium we add the corresponding sodium salt . of oxalate anion or the oxalic acid and at . particular pH calcium oxalate is . precipitated  . and we filter it out . This is the basically the corresponding precipitation . and if we can take the corresponding weight . we can find out the . concentration of this calcium  plus Similarly . one more useful polydentate ligand it is useful . for medicine purpose for the drug . purpose also which is ethylenediaminetetraacetato . anion So if we have this ethylene diamine . tetra acetic acid is abbreviated . form EDTA This EDTA is a very useful molecule . it has  nitrogen donor points and  oxygen . donor points and  negative . charges also So it is basically a N  O .  type of hexadentate ligand So these hexadentate . ligand can also bind to the calcium as . well as magnesium also giving a useful M L . type of compound where the metal is there . and the ligand is there in one is to one . stoichiometry . So this is the corresponding oxalate anion . just now we have seen and the ethylene diamine . so these two positions So this is . basically a charged ligand and the back bone . is of same type but it is much more rigid . because this carbons are all planer we do . not have any other distortion from that but . this is cannot be planer because this carbon . and this two carbons are tetrahedral in . nature So the ring the chelate ring what . is forming through binding through these two . nitrogen and binding through these two . oxygen\u2019s on the metal centre they are of . different nature and different type . Oxalate anion can give a very rigid and very . useful planer structure but in case of ethylene . diamine it is little bit puckered And . when three such ethylene diamine molecules . are attaching to the cobalt centre in a  . dimensional form so this is the only limit . of . this when we will discuss about the coordination . number the possible coordination number we . will discuss once again how many . donor atoms we can assemble around the cobalt . centre . So when we have three such ethylene diamine . groups attached So this is one ligand this . is the second ligand and this is the third . ligand and we have a typical octahedral geometry . where these  nitrogen\u2019s like hexamine cobalt .  chloride these  nitrogen\u2019s are . closed to us that means closed to the viewer . and these  are away from the viewer So . these  are in a typical  dimensional in . view and we have different symmetry axis because . this is a square plane and if you view along . this axis it has a fourfold . symmetry . So viewing through these symmetry points . or the symmetry axis we will find that how . the different types of cobalt complexes we . can have but this is a most regular binding . pattern of any first transition series or . the second transition series of elements like . manganese iron cobalt nickel copper etcetera . where if we have a corresponding hexa coordinated . complex it basically gives us . a geometry which is known as an octahedral . geometry So this is the octahedral geometry . so is basically the polyhedron is the . octahedral . So next we see that when we consider all . these molecules so what we see that most of . the molecules what we are talking about . what we are discussing about the either the . molecule or the ion if they are surrounding . the metal centre they can function as a . very good ligand So monodentate ligand also . include virtually all anions and all simple . Lewis bases So if very simple Lewis . bases are there containing  good donor atom .  good hetero donor atom they can function . as a monodentate ligand Also the . halides and the pseudo halides are very useful . anionic ligand whereas ammonia carbon monoxide . and water are particularly well . known common neutral monodentate ligands . So when we have the halides and pseudo halides . we see that C l minus or S C N minus if we . try to find that whether these . halides and pseudo halides how they are binding . to cobalt  plus So these two will form . only the tetrahedral species  . not . octahedral So geometry of these species . are tetrahedral So the typical nature of . these ligand that means that chloride and . the . thiocyanate ligands will tell us that whenever . we have the cobalt available in plus  oxidation . state this is important this plus  . oxidation state not in plus  So they basically . give rise to the corresponding tetra  this . such ligands that means the chloride and . the thiocyanate ligands surrounding this particular . cobalt centre So will end up with only the . tetrahedral geometry . So another type of group what we can see . is related to the thiocyanate is the azide . ion So azide one is nothing but is N  minus . ligand and this N  minus ligand can used . to have  nitrogen atoms and initially immediately . what we can think because it has  . negative charge like hydroxide like thiocyanate . like chloride like bromide So these also . can form immediately to the metal . centre  metal nitrogen bond So initially . we will see that this can function as a monodentate . ligand to the metal ion . Similarly thiocyanate also and this particular . case also the if we can have the  tautometic . geometries like these we can have the . negative charge on nitrogen and negative charge . on sulphur and what we have seen just now . that this can bind to the metal centre . through nitrogen thiocyanato nitrogen coordination . or through thiocyanato sulphur coordination . So since it has three different . donor atoms unlike your azide it has sulphur . it has carbon it has nitrogen . Since carbon is sand which between sulphur . and nitrogen so carbon cannot go for any type . of coordinating interaction to the . metal centre but sulphur can and the other . end that means the nitrogen also can bind . to the metal centre So these are also very . useful ligand what we will see by binding . through the sulphur as well as through nitrogen . Other organic species they can also . function as very good ligand like when we . have alcohol that means R O H function . So any alcohol if we can have particularly . when we use as solvent  . so like water  . these also has lone pair of electrons So . when . these lone pair of electrons are donated to . the metal centre it can function as a very . good ligand and like water also it can also . go . for deprotonation So methoxide ion is formed . and we can have the corresponding complex . of methoxo ion Similarly different . metals also present as that corresponding . metal salts of acetic acid So copper acetate . containing  acetate anion and  water of . crystallization in bivalent oxidation state . So this is also our ligand So it is also . coming in our ligand list and we will discuss . in . our other classes that how these this is C . H  C O O O minus how it is binding to the . metal centre? . And that also will solve the puzzle related . to many other metal acetates because it is . very easy to make from the other . compounds like the corresponding copper carbonate . is a simply add acetic acid  . and after concentration and crystallization . we get . the crystals of copper acetate So this binding . will be very important but again this can . function as a very good ligand to the . copper centre then the other molecules related . to water that means R H  S that means R  . O R  S and R N H these are the . corresponding ammines groups and the substituted . ammines the primary ammine the secondary . ammine and the tertiary ammine . and the different phosphine molecules through . phosphorous . So we see that how this thiocyanate which . is a very simple reagent for reacting to any . metal centre can also a very good . analytical reagent to us When we add thiocyanate . this is colorless also and this is also light . yellow in color So when we add . thiocyanate to the ferric ion because the . ferric ion present in water we already know . that it is basically the corresponding hexa . aqua ferric ion So hexa aqua ferric ion . will be there and when we add only one is . to one stoichiometric amount of thiocyanate . to . the ferric ion solution a blood red solution . is developed due to the formation of his particular . species where one of the bound . water molecule around iron has been substituted . by thiocyanate anion . So what we get? We get a species where  . of them  of the ligands are already present . like that water molecules Only one is . substituted by the corresponding thiocyanate . coordination as isothiocyanate coordination . or thaicyanito nitrogen coordination . through iron nitrogen bond and due to this . particular reaction this particular species . giving rise a very good red coloration So . only one such bond that means the iron nitrogen . bond will modify the corresponding electronic . transition of the species . So if we go on changing the corresponding . concentration of these thiocyanates what we . can see we can substitute all other . present water molecules one after another . from this particular iron centre and we can . substitute all the water molecules present . in . this particular complex species by thiocyanate . anion So if this is the octahedral geometry . around this iron So when initially we . have all these as water molecules and all . water molecules are still there except the . one where we have  water molecule is . substituted by this thiocyanate group So . we have this thiocyanate color change and . we get a corresponding color change from . light yellow to red blood solution . So this will be a very good reaction to know . the characteristic reaction to identify the . presence of iron in any unknown solution . as well as the presence of thiocyanate in . any unknown solution as a reagent or as an . anion So if we want to test the iron solution . will add thiocyanate anion or if we want to . test the thiocyanate in the medium we should . add a solution of ferric chloride . Similarly the like thiocyanate which is a .  atom species having a charge is going to . bind to the iron centre the solvent like water . this is C H  C N that means it is acetonitrile . solvent . It is a very good solvent because it is a . organic solvent unlike your water as a solvent . or methanol as the solvent and within this . particular medium we can dissolve so many . metal salts and so many ligands because some . ligands are there which are insolvable . in water which are in solvable in alcohol . also So this M e C N can function as a very . useful solvent and when they are binding . to the metal centre it can function as a very . good ligand . So one such species what we can make in the . solid state by replacing all other donor atoms . around iron by M e C N and  such . M e C N will be there for a Cu plus centre . Copper is present in plus  oxidation state . So it is a white compound in the solid state . and if we want to prepare it as perchlorate . it is a corresponding perchlorate salt and . this is a very useful reaction to say different . types of reactivity pattern related to Cu . plus copper because it can activate dioxygen . it can also activate some other molecules . organic molecules where this copper is present . this copper is bound to the  nitrogen atoms . of the acetonitrile . So acetonitrile nitrogen this nitrogen is . also a donor atom It also can function as . a donor atom to the metal centre So like . water . like alcohol it can function as a very good . ligand to the metal centre and also one more . important function to this acetonitrile is . that we can displace it by some other incoming . ligand So when we will study the ligand . displacement reaction or ligand . substitution reaction acetonitrile should . be a very good ligand surrounding the metal . centre So acetonitrile will be displaced . as . some other new ligand system can come and . bind to the metal ion . And in case of palladium it is very easy to . make this when we have the palladium chloride . is not a very simple monomeric . species but it can be breezed by chloride . So it is a polymeric compound but when we . dissolve it in acetonitrile in some hot . condition we get the corresponding species . of palladium chloride with  bound acetonitrile . So it is also a  coordinated . palladium complex where  palladium chlorine . bonds are present and  palladium nitrogen . bonds are there which are due to the . coordination of the acetonitrile molecules . to the palladium centre . So we will see next the nitrate ion How . the nitrate ion can function as a ligand? . So N O  minus can be also a very good ligand . to us And while talking about the nitrate . binding we can also think of related to . something which is nitrogen bearing compound . like the gaseous dinitrogen as well as the . gaseous dioxygen These two molecules . can function as a very good ligand and the . reaction products of these two that means . N O  minus N O  minus N O or N O plus . all these can function as a very good ligand . and starting from the effect of nitrogenous . where we can fix these ammonia molecule . to ammonia molecules we get from the dinitrogen . molecule to its oxidation to different nitrogen . base species nitrogen oxide base . species will see that these are basically . going and bind to the metal centre as good . ligand . So during that conversion conversion of . ammonia molecules to nitride nitrate N O . N O plus if there is an intervention of the . metal centre So in metal centre will bind . to all these species and basically go for . their activation for their immediate conversion . So if we just consider the binding of the . simple nitrite in the form of the nitrogen . binding and oxygen binding we know there . are . two types of that binding one through nitrogen . and another through the oxygen but at least . five different possibilities we can . have . So donation from nitrogen gives the nitro . complex and donation from the oxygen gives . the nitrito complex So two different . complexes we can have and like thiocyanate . where we have seen that thiocyanate can bind . through sulphur and through . nitrogen here also it can bind through nitrogen . and oxygen So the corresponding compound . even in the solid state the color of . the compounds will be different and this show . that they can function as some ambidentate . nature of the ligand So ambidentate . binding that means two different donor atoms . are present and two of them are utilized . one in one case and another in the other . case for binding to the metal centre . When both the oxygen atoms can donate to the . metal centre it can find its position as a . chelate complex though it is not so easy . and more examples are not there but in some . cases basically these can function as a chelating . ligand by binding through both the . oxygen atoms because for nitrate it is well . known but for nitrite it is not so easy to . get but it can show the corresponding binding . in chelating form Then we can have unsymmetrical . bridge between two metal centre donating through . the nitrogen to one metal . and through oxygen to the other . That means if we have this nitrogen and oxygen . and this is another oxygen So it can bridge . between two metal centers So it . can function as a bridging ligand also to . metal  and to metal  So this is functioning . as a bridging ligand So the bridge is . possible . And sometime a single oxygen atom also can . bridge two metal centers . So we can have for the substitution of the . corresponding ammonia molecule from the cobalt . centre we get the corresponding . molecule as the corresponding nitrito complex . and the other one is also the nitrato complex . So this nitrito complex when it is . bound through oxygen so when it is bound . through oxygen it is metal stable and it can . isomerise to the yellow version of the . nitro complex or nitrito complex where this . particular species that means this nitrogen . is bound to the cobalt centre through this . nitrogen So these two compounds the color . of these two compound one is the corresponding . isomeric form as the red isomer . and another is the corresponding yellow isomer . So this red isomer and yellow isomer are . present due to the corresponding presence . of the corresponding cobalt oxygen bond on . the nitrate and on the cobalt nitrogen bond . on the nitrite So this is a similar situation . where we see that the water molecules from . the iron centre is substituted by the thiocyanate . and it gives some beautiful coloration due . to that substitution So we can have . the corresponding two isomers one is binding . through the corresponding nitrogen another . is binding through the corresponding . oxygen . So this particular one that means the red . compound and this is the yellow compound . the red isomer where we have the oxygen . of this nitrate group oxygen of this nitrate . group is bound and this oxygen of this nitrate . group is bound to the cobalt centre and . here nitrogen of the nitrate group is bound . to the cobalt centre So the color is drastically . changing from one to other So these . are the two isomeric form and due to the assimilation . of nitrate groups as the different nitrogen . oxides these as one of the . pathways which is known to us that the metal . centre can bind in one form to the other and . one is stable to the other So that . means if we try to activate one particular . form to the other it can go from the nitrogen . coordination to the oxygen coordination or . vice versa . So there are some few examples related to . the classification of this ligand system . We have seen that the pyridine system that . means the pyridine like ammonia  . it has donor atoms over there So pyridine . can bind . to the metal centre through the donation of . its lone pair of electron this is M n plus . this is M n plus So the binding of this . metal . to this this is in the monodentate fashion . So both pyridine and both ammonia can bind . to the metal centre in monodentate . fashion for the formation of the corresponding . complex . But if we go for the bipyridine ligand using . two pyridine units which are in the cis position . so this is a very good bidentate ligand . like ethylene diamine And like ethylene diamine . it has some rigid back bone the pyridine . type of back bone and when it is . binding to the cobalt sorry ruthenium when . it is binding to the ruthenium it can go for . the corresponding tris complex that means . the  bipyridine units are attached to ruthenium . ruthenium in plus twos and  chloride ions . are outside the coordination sphere It . has very interesting properties it has also . very useful electron transfer behavior also . and it has some other catalytic behavior and . some practical applications . So the ligand modification is important to . get some important properties out of the ruthenium . which is not available if we just . simply use ruthenium chloride So some of . the reaction some of the organic transformations . we find that metal salt is added . along with some ligand sometime the bipyridine . is added that means the reactive species . the active species what is forming over . there is the corresponding tris bipyridine . ruthenium compound and which is beautifully . red in color red powdered solid can be . identified very easily by use of this particular . ligand Similarly one such example of the . bidentate O O donor ligand this is N N . donor bidentate ligand but it is little bit . more flexible O O donor bidentate ligand . which is acetyl acetone . So acetyl acetone is  . nothing but is pentane to  dion so is a . dichitom system where  oxygen atoms are available . for binding to . the metal centre When it binds to the metals . centre it forms the corresponding compound . like this like bipyridine it can bind to .  . such positions and it is binding through oxygen . carbon atoms are not utilized for any kind . of interaction . So these two oxygens when they are bind to . this particular metal centre in octahedral . form in the manganese acetyl acetone . compound So usually it is stabilizing the . trivalent manganese because after deprotonation . it gives us through the keto inert . tautomerism  negative charge So ligand . is bidentate mono negative ligand and it is . stabilizing manganese in plus  oxidation . state Similarly it can stabilize vanadium . center with the vanadium oxo center that means . the vanadium center by binding in a . different geometry these geometry is different . from that which is a square pyramidal geometry . which is V O a c a c whole  . So this is the acetyl acetone ligand which . is present with manganese as the tris manganese . compound in the octahedral geometry . and in vanadium system it is in the V O a . c a c system in a square pyramidal geometry . So we will see more of these type of . examples in some of this classification of . these ligands and what are the more more and . more complex ligand systems we can . have ultimately we reach to the biological . system where biological ligands are much more . complex to bind to the metal centre . Thank you .  . '][u'Good evening everybody Today we will just . continue the classification of the ligands . in the first part we have seen that how we . can classify the different ligands in terms . of their denticity that means the number of . donor atoms . Now we will see that these ligands can be . further classified in terms of the nature . of the  . donor atoms which is very important So . we can have this nitrogen based donor atoms . that means what we have seen in the most simple . one which comes to our mind is . the simple ammonia molecule and which is also . a monodentate ligand . Then we can have the bidentate ligand based . on the same nitrogen which is ethylene diamine . So one is that that nitrogen based . ligands then we can have the oxygen based . one So oxygen based ligand the simplest . possible as monodentate we have seen is . the water one then we can have different types . of other bidentate ligands like that of catechol . and others So these are the simple . possible bidentate ligands where we can have . the nitrogen nitrogen donor atoms or oxygen . oxygen donor atoms and at the same . time we can also have the combination of these .  So the combination of these  we can get . for the simple amino acid say . glycine This glycine when binds to a particular . metal centre is not a symmetric one and also . it is a mixed donor type nitrogen and . oxygen donor type . Then we can have the sulphur donor then we . can have the phosphorus donor and also the . carbon donor That means when we . have the carbon donor ligand present we consider . that we can have the corresponding metal carbon . bond So carbon donor . ligand can give us a system where we can have . the metal carbon bond and this metal carbon . bond from that of our simple . compound tetracarbonylnickel is a very important . class of compound which are also known as . the organometallic compound . So all these ligands when they are present . in a typical backbone and also we see that . in some cases if x is the typical donor point . and we can encircle the all the  donor atoms . like this and we can put the metal centre . at the centre and we get a bigger cyclic . ligand and this particular cyclic ligand . We can consider it as a macrocycle is a bigger . cycle so this isthemacro one So . macrocyclic one so it has also important role . to play and is biology also it is very well . known . So we can have this again that means it can . have nitrogen it can have oxygen it can have . sulphur or it can have the phosphorus . donor atom and which binds to the metal centre . So depending upon the nature of the donor . atoms and the corresponding . skeleton the structure of the ligand system . we can have the different types of metal complex . So in this class of the classification of . the ligands second part we will see the first . example which is nothing but  pyridine rings . attached together from the ortho position . of one pyridine ring to the other ortho position . and again another ortho position of the . nitrogen to the third ring So this we can . see we can consider this sort of ligand what . we have earlier seen which is has similarity . with the Ammonia so ammonia lone pair was . utilised for the bonding to the metal centre . Then we see that the pyridine lone pair also . can be donated to the metal centre and if .  of the pyridine donor atoms are present . side by side  . we get the bipyridine ligand which is abbreviated . as b p y so b p y is also a neutral one neutral . n n donor bidentate . ligand and when it binds to any metal centre . we can have like ethylene diamine if it is . a bis compound we get a bis compound of . this type But it is compared to the ethylene . diamine compound it has more a rigid backbone . So the property the catalytic . activity and all other things would be different . compared to the corresponding ethylene diamine . molecule similarly if we can go . for the third one that means b p y backbone . plus another p y we get the corresponding . ligand which is known as terpyridine So . this is our terpyridal ligand Where we see . we can have  nitrogen donor atoms and which . are close to each other So if we put . metal centre over here so we get one particular . side with the attachment of  nitrogen donor . atoms So if this terpyridine we can . consider as n n n so it is n nnn type of . tridentate ligand and all these . Nitrogen donor atoms are pyridine based so . if we have the metal ion like palladium  . plus So palladium  plus will bind with . this .  nitrogen atoms and if we start to make this . compound from palladium chloride So  p . d c l bond would be there and roughly . speaking the corresponding geometry of the . compound would be square planar with  palladium . nitrogen and one palladium c l . bond so we basically enclose the  donor points . from one side for a square planar compound . And if it is a typical octahedral . compound so if the geometry is different  . is octahedral in nature then we can have the .  positions for coordination and this  . coordinations now can be occupied since it . is a very rigid one so only  type of binding . is possible  . and  most important . compound is the ruthenium  which can be very . easily make with  ruthenium nitrogen bonds . and we can write down this . compound when this nitrogens are as ruthenium . bis compound and if the ruthenium centre is . in the plus  . Oxidation state it is the plus  and the corresponding . salts can be p f  can be perclorate or anything . else So the sort of ligand is . also very important because the photo physical . and other properties for this ruthenium compounds . are very rich they can go for . electron transfer behaviour it can be oxidised . from bivalent to the trivalent state and sometimes . in the excited states their electron . transfer properties are different . So this is  type of such ligands the tridentate .  based on only pyridine donor atoms and related . to this Just now we have seen . that if we can have a bigger cyclic ligand . we call it as a macro cyclic ligand But . if the cycle is not so big it is little bit . small and if . we can have only  nitrogen donor atoms and . those are of secondary donor atoms that means . functions are NH So these . nitrogen loan pairs from this nitrogen to . this nitrogen to this nitrogen are all available . to bind to the metal centre So binding of . this tridentate N  type of ligand would be . completely different from this binding because . this is . Basically when binding to the palladium or . platinum centre it is going from one particular . side and only  of those sides are bound . by these  nitrogen but compared to this . the molecule which is known as triazascyclononane . so triazascyclononane or . abbreviated as t a c n This tack end ligand . will bind in a different mode to the metal . centre but it can also satisfy the  donor . points so binding to any metal centre can . provide us  metal nitrogen bonds the first . bond with this nitrogen the second bond with . this nitrogen and the third bond with this . nitrogen so if we can make . The  tack end compound of copper chloride . which is well known as a catalyst for hydrolytic . cleavage of phosphodiester bonds . of d Na It has some biochemical reactivity . for the esters activity so esters activity . can only be shown for this sort of ligand . where . the binding of this compared to any other . tridentate ligand is completely different . what we see in this particular case is that . when . we have or terpyridil type of ligand . We can simply say that terpyridines there . and which is providing us  nitrogen donor . atoms and they are forming  bonds in one . particular plane And if the charge is satisfied . by  chlorides binding it would be the corresponding . copper terpuridilc l  . molecules which are copper terpuridilc l  . So the structure of this particular molecule . is completely different because what we . have seen that in case of palladium or any . other . Square planar molecule the nitrogens are binding . through these points and if we have copper . so this is the C l and this is another . C l so it is square pyramidal in geometry . So why we need why we are classifying all . these ligands in different categories? . Because if we go for the tack end ligand we . have  NH groups which are more or less in . one particular plane and which are . connected by ethylene backbone . So this particular type of ligand cannot . go for binding for this square pyramidal geometry . instead it can go for one particular . face So if we have a triangular face of . one side of the copper so if this is copper . so this is one NH This is second NH and this . is . third NH of the tack end So tack end is . going to bind the cooper centre and we have .  copper nitrogen bonds and and we have  . such chlorine bonds to copper also the geometry . of this molecule is completely different to . that of this one and is a very useful . molecule for showing the corresponding phosphor . esters activity So this particular one means . this particular face it is basically a . face it is occupying which is trigonal So . one particular face is the trigonal face of . the copper centre and  other positions are . free So all the reactivity pattern for the . d n a hydrolysis or any other thing can be . achieved from the other side similarly if . a . compound like manganese or anything which . basically supports the octahedral geometry . when it supports the octahedral . geometry we can have one tack end from below . and another . Tack end from above so these are all the nitrogen\xe2\u20ac\u2122s . n h n h n h n h n h and n h so these are forming .  such bonds so is one face . one trigonal face is occupied and another . trigonal face is also occupied for the coordination . of  tack end molecules to the . manganese centre giving rise to same octahedral . geometry but here now both the sides that . means both the trigonal faces are . occupied So it is basically capped from . the top as well as capped from below and in . this Particular geometry its reactivity . pattern should be less . So it is showing the esters activity when . it is bound to copper centre and we can prepare . also its very easily because this . cyclisation thing is also we can have this . one particular is the ethylene diamine part . then another ethylene diamine So it is . diethylenetriamine part so diethylenetriamine . part if it is connected by another ethylene . backbone we get the tack end and during . the preparation of this we get the corresponding . isolation of the tack end . Compound as its corresponding hydrochloride . salt so is dot  HCl is written So it is . a tack end hydrochloride salt We can have . then simple metal salt like copper chloride . is used to react with this and in solution . which is alkaline with respect to sodium . hydroxide Sodium hydroxide is given the cuppa .  tack end copper chloride compound where . cuppa  gives us the  points of . attachment like new nomenclature to the tack . end to the copper centre then water and NaCl . is coming out so we nicelyand Very . simple way we get the corresponding dichloro . tack end compound . So if we just proceed further where we can . have another long linear chain of ligand is . that compound . Diethylenetriamine which is known as trione . so like that where you have that NH  type . of ligand Now we can have . diethylenetriamine triethylenetetramine sorry . the triethylenetetramine molecule using this . backbone of diethylenetriamine which . one more extension of the ethylene backbone . So straight away we can see that since we . have  nitrogen donor atom and all  if . they are utilised to bind to the metal centre . we get a tetra dentate ligand so very simple . way we get the corresponding trion is . tetra dentate and this one is n  ligand  . and this n  ligand can be further derivatised . Because we have the NH  . At the  ends of the backbone and these NH .  ends are very well known for the formation . of bases with say  . hydroxybenzaldehyde or salysaldihyde So . not from the ligand itself but for the trion . so trion when reacts with  molecules of . salysaldihyde We get the corresponding hexa . dented ligand which is very useful ligand . So in a simple reaction of ion with . salysaldihyde we get n  o  type hexa dentate . ligand and this hexa dented ligand can bind . very nicely with any  d metal ion  or . d metal ion or  d metal ion also say with . n i  plus giving n i  plus as the corresponding . perchlorate or acitate salt As simple n i . l plus complex where all the  positions . in octahedral fashion In this fashion where . the manganese will be substituted by this . particular nickel centre So octahedral nickel . compound can be obtained from a simple condensation . product of trion and . salysaldihyde and this particular one this . ligand has a corresponding amine backbone . so at the  ends this particular end and this . particular end we have the amine backbone . So this particular ligands are also known . as the corresponding sib bases or the sib . base ligand so this particular amine that . means . triethylenetetramine is very useful One when . it is in the pure form or it is condensing . with some other aldehydes like . salysaldihyde or pyridine  aldehyde also . when it can be condensed with pyridine  aldehyde . it can give us the similar type of sib . base ligand But the donor atoms all will . be nitrogen so it would be a n  ligand binding . to any octahedral metal ion this is . another form of this particular n  ligand . which is known as tris  amino ethyle amine . so this is the central nitrogen which is . connected by  amino ethylebackbone so this . you can consider as a derivative of ammonia . Molecule where ammonia nitrogen is bound to .  nitrogen atoms but instead of  nitrogen . atoms now we can have  amino ethyle . groups attached to the nitrogen and these . nitrogens all can give rise to the corresponding . coordination to the metal centre So this . is a linear tetradentate ligand n  type this . is not a linear one but this is a capping . one So one particular end can be capped . with . use of this particular train ligand So this . is abbreviated as train and we can have further . based condensation we can go for the . based condensation at the free NH  ends of . this once that condensation is taken place . with salysaldihyde we can have a hepta . dentate ligand because we are further functionalising . this nitrogen to No this  N o and this nitrogen . also to N o So  such N o . donor atoms gives us  donor points and this . central nitrogen so that would be basically . a hepta dentate ligand in our had if we go . for the corresponding based condensation with .  molecules of Salysaldihyde So if we just . simply use this particular train ligand . the tris  amino ethyle amine ligand and when . it is binding to any metal centre So this . is the central nitrogen this nitrogen is . bound over here so this is one other amino . ethyle backbone This is the second amino . ethyle backbone and other one is the third . one so if this particular centre if this metal . centre is copper centre and copper chloride . is reacting within this fashion such that . we . can have one copper chlorine bond only and . all other  positions are occupied by the . nitrogen donor atoms of the amine So we . basically get coordination number of  around . the metal centre which is copper and charge . is neutralised if this is only  copper . chlorine bond . So it is has a different geometry compared . to the corresponding tack end copper c l compound . and the geometry is also quite . different Since we are occupying this particular . nitrogen which is the tertiary nitrogen and . this tertiary nitrogen can show some . long metal nitrogen bond So the overall . geometry of this particular system is trigonalbipyramidal . so this trigonal plane the . baseltrigonal plane is found from  NH  groups . they are a similar the bonding property of . these  NH  groups are of same type . And these  NH groups are directly attaching . to the metal centre say copper  plus and . they remain in a singe plane So this is . our trigonal plane and the part is the trigonal . this trigonalbipyramidal part is that one . nitrogen from the central nitrogen of the . amine this nitrogen and another one can be . c l can be B r or can be F also when we are . reacting with copper chloride . Copper bromide or copper fluoride so we get . a t b p geometry So very nicely we can have . using this sort of ligand so ligand can . create a typical geometrical environment around . the metal centre which is trigonalbipyramidal . and when little bit reorganisation . is taking place and if the centre is not copper . But if it is nickel or if it is iron or cobalt . which has a preference for octahedral . geometry this particular metal centre can . give rise to  coordination positions  from . the ligand and  from the halides this can . be . chloride this can be bromide So what happens . that this particular geometry as some distortion? . Because this particular . accommodation of x is required so when this . NH  MnH  bond in this molecule was around .  degree this bond is around  . degree which is reduced to around  degree . for a octahedral geometry So squeezing of . this NH  MnH  bond is required for . the movement of the trigonalbipyramidal geometry . to an octahedral geometry and which is also . possible if we move from one . metal centre to other which has a typical . preference for octahedral coordination Then . we can have another type of ligand which . is very useful in organic synthesis which . is box type known as box also which is abbreviated . as box which is brisoxazolin type of . ligand So bisoxazolinis abbreviated so brisoxazolin . type of ligand is abbreviated as box because . is the oxazolin ring so if we . have the methylene spacer here this is the . CH  group . So if we have the CH  spacer over here and .  oxazolin rings oxa and eza in the same ring . So  oxazolin rings are attached on . the  sides of the methylene ring so which . is a tetrahedral carbon so we can specify . the corresponding nitrogen nitrogen . geometry Since this is also a typical bidentate . type of ligand but the geometry pattern is . completely different compared to . ethylene diamine or bipyridine So this gives . rise to some n n donor type of bidentate ligand . because the free rotation around this . Carbon carbon bond or this carbon carbon bond . can bring rise to thus oxygen also But the . preference for this nitrogen . coordination which is also dependent on this . substitutions are on this  membered ring . is also required and which is fixing this . particular geometry and this ligand has a . preference for nitrogen nitrogen coordination . to the metal centre So from this . methelene backbone the CH  backbone If we . just move to a pyridine backbone and pyridine . ring can be utilised for . fictionalisation from its  and  positions . With the use of  oxazolin rings so we get . a p box ligand p box ligand is a typical tridentate . ligand but this particular ligand is a . different one compared to the tripyridine . ligand because the geometry is different its . coordination is different and the . corresponding metal nitrogen bond distance . and the corresponding strain on the ligand . is also completely different So several . coordination complexes can be made with this . particular type of ligand for seeing whether . they are catalytically active or not . some useful compounds on manganese or copper . or bisoxazolin Ligands are extremely useful . in the different types of . asymmetric synthesis so in organic chemistry . the asymmetric synthesis has been benefitted . a lot with the use of this sort of . ligands where the typical geometry has been . adopted compared to the bipyridial or terpyridial . type of ligands . So these are therefore one other group of . ligands then we can go for a typical macro . cyclic ligand where we can have  donor . atoms and if they are nitrogen bearing as . we have defined earlier that these nitrogens . can be connected very easily and when we . connect we get a complete cyclic geometry . and this can be derived If these are all . NH like getting tack end from . diethylenetriamine So this can be obtained . if we consider the train backbone the train . was NH .  NH NH and NH  so only thing that this . particular backbone has to be connected So . if these  ends we can connect say by . dibromo ethane or say glyoxal using these .  molecules So we can get a cyclic product . and this cyclic product is related to the . tack end molecule but is of bigger size so . this cavity size  . is important this cavity size will say what . type of ligand can go and . enter whether it is f e  plus or m n  plus . or cobalt  plus or  plus . So this we get so if we have this only ethylene . backbone for this so all the  nitrogen atoms . are connected by  ethylene bridges . then we get one particular type of ligand . which is known as cyclane Which is nothing . but one    tetra ezacyclododeccan . which is like that of tack end triezacyclononane . is cyclododeccan Which is having eight plus .  twelve atoms in the backbone in . tack end we have nine backbone . That is why the nomenclature ends with the . nonane end this is dodeccan end So when . we find that how this particular geometry . can bind because these are all saturated CH . groups saturated CH groups those are all . tetrahedral carbon So when the . tetrahedral carbon is try to bind some metal . centre this entire ring basically cannot be . a planar one But it is basically a puckered . one where we see that  nitrogen atoms these . n h groups because n h groups this is nitrogen . this is second this is third and the . forth one . So all  nitrogen donor atoms are basically . going towards the upward direction that means . this is nitrogen is basically a pyramidal . one because the third bond which is attached . to this nitrogen is the NH bond So this . is pyramidalthis is pyramidal so  . pyramidal nitrogens are pointing towards the . upward direction and when these  adjacent . nitrogens are in the upward direction . So we have the downward direction of the . backbone and which is trying to coordinate . to the metal centre so when we have a . corresponding compound of zinc to cyclane . So zinc atom is basically sitting on this . particular ring in this particular cyclic . ring . zinc atom is sitting over there and ethanol . molecule is coordinating fulfilling the fifth . coordination site for the zinc atom So this . ligand is providing  donor atoms  nitrogen . atoms are provided by this ligand and the . fifth one is by the corresponding ethanol . So this Particular geometry is much more . flexible and we have a puckered geometry for . this ligand system so this can be found . from the reference of an organic chemistry . by an American chemical society . Then if we just increase the backbone from . ethane to propane that means CH whole  to . CH whole  That means we have a . little bit relaxed macro cycle which is a . different one and we call it as a cyclam . So cyclam ligand is related to the previous . one . but it has a different cavity size for the . coordination to the metal centre and we have . all isomeric forms We can have since all . the NH groups can be substituted by n methyl . or n ethyl So depending upon the positioning . of  methyl or  ethyl groups we can . have different types of isomers Because we . have seen in the previous example that when . the nitrogen is in pyramidal side we . have the hydrogen in the backbone there and . hydrogen is now substituted by methyl and . ethyl groups so either this methyl group . can be up or can be down so in  of them are . up we have this geometry when  of them are . up . So in this sequence we can have all this . possible isomeric forms when simply the nickel . is bound tocyclam so we have the . corresponding square planar complex and metal . cyclam complexes are all isomeric in nature . depending upon the corresponding . orientation of the n methyl or n ethyl groups . Similarly if we just simply go from nitrogen . to oxygen which is not so strongly coordinating . to the metal centre but we can have . very poorly donating Ligand system but which . is cyclic in nature like the binding of the . ether so if we have the ether say diethyl . ether and if we just compare this diethyl . ether with that of our water molecule So . we all know this water molecule so this loan . pair of electrons on ether and water molecules . are available for coordination but this binding . is not so strong which is weak . coordinating to the metal centre So when . one ethyl is available we get a corresponding . coordination to one particular metal . centre But if we can have more than one . such ethyl group such as this one this can . also go and bind to the a typical metal ion . So if we now complete the cycle by  or  . donor atoms  ethyl like of this thing we . get a cyclic system where this cyclic systems . are known as the corresponding crown ethers . So these are another group of ligands in . this particular class they are crown ether . ligands because they are very useful and they . can bind to metal ions like sodium potassium . and other very weakly like that of the . coordination of the water molecule . So when we have  oxygen atoms and the backbone . is completing with  that means  carbon . and  oxygens Which is  C  . similarly if we change to   oxygen it . is C  C  and if we have  benzo backbone . we get dibenzo  c  crown ether and if . one oxygen is replaced by n h we get dieza .  c  which is analog of this  c  molecule . but  oxygen donor atoms of the ether . are replaced by  eza functions of NH So . this has been a very useful molecule for binding . to the potassium ion the alkali metal . or alkaline earth metal which how we just . basically transport particular in the biologically . system from cell membrane from one . side to the other So we need some selective . ligands for potassium binding which we are . not discussing in detail for cordsons . chemistry that means the chemistry related . to the metal ions but the binding of this . alkali or alkaline earth metals are very . important so when potassium ion is coordinating . with  crown  . We have this particular one which is  crown .  so copper potassium is sitting over here . and  oxygen atoms are binding to this . particular potassium because this cavity size . is matching very much with that of our potassium . ion and this particular geometry . Because this particular geometry is also fulfilling . the corresponding puckered movement from one . side this is up this is down this . is down this is up to make a corresponding .  dimensional structure that means the coordinating . geometry around this potassium is . octahedral in nature So like that of our . other transition metal ions which are based . on a typical octahedral geometry potassium . is . trapped within the crown ether by such  oxygen . donor atoms related to that of the coordination . of water molecules . So this oxygen can also be substituted by . sulphur which gives rise to   trithayacyclononane . Like that of our tack end . molecules where all the sulphur groups were . occupied by n h functions then this is also . a related ligand compared to this one . which is a cyclic one But this is an acyclic . one bearing  sulphur and one oxygen donor . which is well known for binding the . heavy metal ions and during world war  and . all This case time this has been developed . is a dimarcraprol or British anti levisite . molecule we call it because it binds heavier . metal ions like cadmium zinc mercury and all . this which are very much poisonous . even it goes if it goes to our body also it . has some detrimental effect on our body So . we want to eliminate by using this sort of . ligand or this type of ligand to coordinate . to the metal centre and coming out from the . body Similarly this sulphur binding to the . heavy metal ion can also be established through . a other simple ligand which is known as diethiocarbamate . So a sodium diethyl diethiocarbamate is another . type of ligand where we take diethyl amine . this is basically diethyl amine and . when diethyl amine is reacted with carbon . disulphide in sodium hydroxide medium We . get the corresponding sodium diethyl . carbamate ligand and like this ligand like . this ligand this also binds to these  sulphur . atoms So these  sulphur atoms when binds . to the metal centre it is basically providing . the corresponding bidentate sulphur sulphur . ligand to the metal centre . So s and s if it is there which is coming . from diethyl carbamate and its binds to the . metal centre through sulphur so s s bidentate . ligand so s s bidentate ligand is our diethyl . diethiocarbamate and this diethyl diethiocarbamate . We can see can further be categorised to binding . to the different metal centres then another . class of bicyclic ligand We can have . this is one other type of bicyclic ligand . related to the nitrogen coordination and oxygen . coordination like that of our crown ether . So if we have  oxygen donor atoms from one . side so this is the cyclic backbone and this . another kind that means which is . connected this nitrogen which were originally . NH function So we have one cycle and this . is another cyclic so this is basically a . bicyclic ligand and this type of molecules . are known as cript ends and this cript ends . are synthetically prepared . It can be bicyclic or it can be also polycyclic . so it is useful for binding a variety of cations . and it is also bidentate and polydentate . in nature so is one half of this bidentate . part can go to bind a metal centre here so . if all the  donor atoms are utilised for . binding . Say one metal centre say potassium like crown . ether So this potassium when it is centrally . located it binds to  oxygen atoms . only and this nitrogens are not utilised for . any coordination to the metal centre because . already we are having this particular . nitrogen which is pyramidal in nature so if . the pyramid is like this the loan pair is . available on the other side of this nitrogen . Similarly the loan pair is also available . from this point to the other side of the ring . So these  nitrogens will not be utilised . for . coordination to the metal centre instead we . are providing in a different way  donor atoms . like  oxygen atoms to the metal . centre In a bicyclic structure so these are . all criptend molecules and they basically . encapsulate they trap the metal ion very . nicely within this particular cavity So . apart from this macro cyclic ligand this is . a bicyclic one which has a sphere like . arrangement and which can trap the metal ion . very nicely within this particular cavity . and this particular cavity also gives us this . particular coordination So this nitrogen . and this nitrogen when it is puckered this . nitrogen is pointing towards this particular . end . and when this nitrogen is pointing towards . this particular atom it is forcing to show . some other interaction . So you have see that in this structure this . particular coordination for this metal centre . is from  oxygens as well as  nitrogens . So . it is  coordinated so bigger metal ion like . lanthanides and all can be very nicely placed . within the cript end pocket So bigger as . well as we can put potassium also starting . point when we synthesis the potassium salt . of this can be made which can be . exchanged with the other lanthanide ions for . the coordination with this particular cript . end sphere . So like that of our acilite acetone so if . we have the substitution for the acitile group . by the  phenyl rings in this particular case . of this molecules we will see that acilite . acetone can be moved form one particular point . to the other where we have more rigid . structure more rigid back bone which is known . as benzoil acetone So this benzoil acetone . having this b h backbone and it can . bind to the metal centre in a bidentate fashion . So these two donor points through analysation . so this will be o h through analysation by . taking  hydrogen from  CH group to . make it a o o mono negative bidentate ligand . like acetyl acetone similarly people are . also trying to make a newer type of ligand . by substitution Since the phenyl ring has . been introduced like benzene ring we can go . for substitutions in the para position of . this . phenyl ring so substitutions in the para position . of this phenyl rings can give us some useful . information Because this molecule is . not only useful for binding to the metal centre . through these  oxygen atoms but it can be . useful for some other activity like . making this molecule and is known as the corresponding . abo benzene Abo benzone is nothing but butyl . methoxidibenzoil . methane so is a butyl function and another . is the methoxy substitution . So  substitutions at  ends of the phenyl . ring particular the para position by butyl . function as the methoxy function of dibenzoil . methane can be can be useful because it is . soluble in non aqueous medium is soluble in . oil and any other cream material is very . useful ingredient for use as a sunscreen lotion . because it absorb the full spectrum of u v . a radiation so the range of u v ray . radiation can be absorbed by this particular . molecule and sunburn due to u v exposer can . be stopped And this molecule is . therefore is a ligand but it has found that . it can have some other application as well . So another type of ligand is also well known . is also another class for the chelating one . which is the pincer ligand which binds . tightly to  adjacent coplanar sites So . if we have c adjacent coplanar sites like . that of our type of ligand So if we have . one . donor point and another donor point and the . third donor point So  such donors if they . are available and if this  are adjacent . coplanar sites that means one plane and the . other plane are basically giving rise to a . basically a planar tridentate arrangement . not . that it can move to some other plane and usually . it binds in a meridional configuration That . means in plane configuration is . available for binding to the metal centre . so this particular ligand is one sort of this . example of the pincer ligand This is another . pincer type of ligand so like that of our . terpyridil ligand what we have seen earlier . the terpyridil ligand have one pyridine here . second pyridine here and third pyridine here . instead of that Now we can have in  ortho . positions of the pyridine ring the one as . the phosphin donor and another as the nitrogen . donor so n n diethyl donor from the right . hand side and phosphin donor with butyl . groups tertiary butyl function which is a . bulky group so if we put bulky groups around . this phosphorus and  other bulky groups . around this nitrogen we will see that we are . forcing this particular plane which is a  . membered chilate ring around ruthenium and . this is also another  membered chilate ring . on the other side But this is bearing phosphorus . and and this is bearing nitrogen and . if they are pretty close to each other and . if the planar arrangement is such that it . is very tightly bound So what we find that . we . find a typical geometry for this ruthenium . centre where we are providing a tridentate . coordination around this ruthenium centre . So basically what we get we get this nitrogen . this is another nitrogen and this is the phosphorous . But the size of this the chilate . ring size is very important which is basically . this sort of thing we can have when we have . this  carbon spacer If we can have so .  carbon spacer more relaxed so what we get . we basically this particular form that means . we have Phosphorous also and the  . carbon spacer and this nitrogen So this is . basically a  membered ring and if we can . go for other type of ring like this pincer . one . In case of pincer ligand we can have these . as the corresponding planar part and this . planar part basically giving the corresponding . meridional configuration and we have two positions . available which can be occupied by x and y . It is not that one tridentate half . and we can have another tridentate half around . this ruthenium such that we get the octahedral . geometry Instead of that we can . have a  coordinated geometry if we have the . ruthenium . Similarly if we go for iridium when pyridine . is substituted by the benzene ring we have . the metal carbon bond so it is basically a . typical example of organo of metallic compound . and  hydride bonds are also there And which . is giving rise to a trigonal . pyramidal geometry So these are very good . catalyst in turn so pincer ligands are very . useful for their catalytic activity Because . we can use some of these positions for useful . catalytic activities that we are not bringing . any other ligand but we will go for only . the substrate binding and the reagent binding . from these two positions Here also the substrate . binding and reagent binding by . removal of this carbon monoxide and hydrogen . Thank you .  . '][u'Good evening everybody So today we will . finish the remaining part of the ligands . how we are classifying; so it is part three; . so . the different classification what we have . seen Now we will just talk about one of . the important class what we find in the . Biology So if we deal with some biological . systems so well we are talking about so . much about the different metal ions So . these are the metal ions corresponding metal . ions in the living system So if we can have . metal ions in the living system then . obviously we can have the corresponding ligands . So what are those ligands that typically . bind the metal ions which are available in . the biological system? And most important . class of ligands will\u2026 all the time we will . be talking about that if we have the corresponding . amino acids and all the amino acids . has the name stands they have all the time . the corresponding amino function and the carboxyl . function And we will all know . that if we have certain species the N H  . function as well as COOH function and if . both the groups are participating to bind . the . metal ion we will basically get a ligand . system which can be considered as a no donor . ligand . And apart from that this is the corresponding . amino acid sequence If you can have the long . chain which is connected within this . N H  and C OO H function then we can have . some pendant groups as well which is the . corresponding pendant group So if . these basic amino acids as well as their condense . products; that means amides are there So . apart from this; that means we have . the N H  functionality Then we can have . the peptide back bone and the other C O O . H and we can have these pendant group P . from here as well as pendant group from here . depending upon the corresponding availability . of the amino acid sequence in the . long poly peptide chain . So we will find that if this particular system . can have some interaction with the metal ion . then these N H  group can start . interacting these pendant group with some . nitrogen hetero cycle or the carboxin can . also give some interaction with metal center . The N H function of the amide group as well . as the oxygen function of the amide group . can also show some interactions . Similarly the other P group as well as one . of these oxygen of the carboxin can show some . interaction with the metal ion So . strictly speaking any biological system containing . amino acid or amide or polypeptide can have . some potential binding donor . groups which can bind the metal ions very . nicely . So we will see that what are the different . types of ligands we can have in the life processes . Very basic life processes are all . dependent on the metal ions and also they . are dependent very much on the corresponding . ligand system Since in this class we . are talking about the corresponding different . types of ligands what we can have and their . corresponding availability to the metal . center which are available in life system . in a very low concentration So the most . important class of this apart from this amino . acid and polypeptides we can have the biological . macrocycles And this biological macro cycles . can have of different types . One is of this type which is basically a cyclic . ligand where four nitrogen donor atoms are . available And all four nitrogen donor . atoms are connected within a big macrocyclic . structure and the metal ion will be sitting . at the center of this cycle . So this particular\u2026 that the cyclic rain . is the pyrole ring we all know So this . pyrole ring when they are connected by some . methyne regions the C H bridge; these are . all four C H bridges So when four pyrole . units are connected by four methane rings . we get the corresponding macro cycle And . this macro cycle is known as the corresponding . tetrapyrole macrocycle . So biological system can have a tetrapyrole . system which is a tetrapyrole system So . we can have one pyrole unit another . pyrole unit another pyrole unit and the fourth . one So knowing that thing that what we have . seen the\u2026 triethylenetetraammine . and so many types of ligands we have discussed . so far this immediately tells us that if . all the four nitrogen donor atoms are . utilized for metal coordination we get a . typically N  tetradentate ligand system . So this N  tetradentate ligand system is . suitably binding to the metal system in a . planar arrangement . If this particular structure is planar one . so for any octahedral type of binding which . is a three dimensional binding we can have . nitrogen nitrogen nitrogen and nitrogen . over here So all four nitrogen atoms if . they are connected we get at a tetrapyrole . unit . And if there is further coordination from . the fifth coordination site and the sixth . coordination site like two donor groups like . X . and Y we get a typical octahedral coordination . around the metal center . If the metal center what we are just seeing . in the slide that iron is there so if we . consider that iron is present; so we can . have a . typical octahedrally coordinated center where . only one ligand system is present which is . providing the N  tetradentate . coordination And two monodentate coordination . are coming which are in apical direction . One is perpendicular above the plane . and another is below the plane which are . X and Y; so giving a typical six coordinated . geometry around this iron center . So what we see that this particular iron . when we can have a large heterocyclic organic . ring we call this as the porphyrin So . porphyrin is the unit which is present and . since it has biological origin so the biologically . this can be synthesized in our body . also in the human body also we can synthesize . this particular unit from some amino acid . residues And these amino acids . residues ultimately can give us some substituted . positions . So we can have this pyrole unit these two . positions; so all four pyrole unit can have . two positions for regular substitutions And . all eight positions are suitably substituted . So after substitution we get basically a . one type of porphyrin ring And that particular . porphyrin ring present is in one system and . functioning for one particular reaction And . if we vary the substitutions and instead . of this methyl and phenyl groups if we can . have some other groups these are the two . propionic acid groups And these two are . again methyl substitutions So if we just . simply vary from all these positions so substitutions . can change the nature of the . porphyrin and we get the corresponding porphyrin . as porphyrin a porphyrin b and all these different . types of nomenclature also . we can make . So we can have the basic porphyrin And then . the suitable substitutions on that particular . porphyrin can give rise to a system . where we can have the corresponding different . types of the reactivities for their biological . origin So when we have the simple . porphyrin and which is bound to F e  that . means iron two; so in this plane typically . what we get within this particular plane . we . have if we have iron and when it is bound . to this all four positions we get the heme . group So depending upon the nature of this . porphyrin we consider as heme a heme b heme . c and all these But the basic thing is that . we have the porphyrin plus iron giving . rise to the heme structure And when the . protein chain is coming which is globin and . this particular globin is responsible for . this . coordination from this Y . So the globin is basically responsible for . coordination from Y; we get hemoglobin which . is present in our blood And . hemoglobin is the molecule which is responsible . for our oxygen trapping reaction So there . are not only hemoglobin but also we . can have the myoglobin molecules And they . are all typically iron tips of a pyrole system . So iron complex of the porphyrin . ligand So iron complex of the porphyrin . ligand further coordinating form the globin . so is the methyl zone nitrogen is formed . the . amino acids site chain is coming So this . is nothing but the nitrogen of the amide zone . ring of the long polypeptide chain of the . globin which is bound from Y And this particular . X is responsible for binding water molecule . or the oxygen when we are . utilizing hemoglobin for respiration . So when we have the hemoglobin form or the . myoglobin form we can have two different . types of hemoglobin One is the . corresponding deoxy form; that means when . it is not interacting with the dioxygen it . is only coordinating to the water from the . sixth site And another form is known as . the oxy form; when this water molecule from . this position is replaced by dioxygen . molecule So during respiration we need oxygen . And that oxygen is stored in our body and . ultimately is required for burning of . the food material for our energy and for A . T P synthesis But that starts from the very . basic Coordination Chemistry of iron . bound by the porphyrin ring and the globin . chain So all the five positions are occupied . So only available position is the sixth . site And through that sixth site it is only . interacting with the dioxygen molecule giving . interesting reactions related to the . oxidation of food molecules . So not only this hemoglobin which is present . in our blood but there are several other . molecules are known as hemeproteins So . when we just consider these as the typical . hemeproteins we can immediately say that . one particular thing can be myoglobin . then hemoglobin which are present in red blood . cells then also we need cytochromes which . are present in electron transfer . chain But there also iron by shuttling between . two oxidation states the redox Chemistry . is involved; iron two and iron three is . involved And that is basically responsible . for generating the electron transfer chain . Then we can have the nitric oxide synthase . So nitric oxide in the biological system . in our body also; if it is required then . this . hemeproteins are coming in to the picture . They play some important role and catalyzes . and oxidizes also; where the heme . proteins are present So there are large . number of molecules available in the biological . system where hemeproteins are . involved And whenever simply we classify . them as hemeproteins we will see that the . iron is typically bound to the porphyrin . rings It is basically the corresponding chemistry . of iron and porphyrin . And biosynthetic path ways are available . where the porphyrin is synthesized in the . living system But in the laboratory also . the . chemically known molecules are there where . we can find and we can synthesize the tetrapyrole . unit nicely such that we can . have the corresponding tetrapyrole molecules . which can bind to the iron system and we \u2026and . we studied the simple iron . porphyrin system related to the corresponding . hemeproteins So that gives us a very important . area which is known as the . corresponding Biocoordination Chemistry under . bioorganic Chemistry . So whenever we talk about the corresponding . bio coordination so we should be talking . about the corresponding ligands which . are available in the living system So living . system have some ligands When it binds to . the metal ion we can consider that . biogenic ligands; ligands of biological origin . is coming and binding to the metal system . So there are some more important examples . are there The next one the second one is . well known to us is the chlorophyll the . green pigment which is responsible for the . photosynthesis in plants So this green photosynthesis . pigment in the plants contains . some chlorin ring So this is chlorin ring . So compared to the porphyrin ring we can . have different types of ring But that is . also . a pyrole system But the connectivity is different . That is why it is binding a different metal . center and it is showing some . different type of reactivity So this is . very much close to that particular tetrapyrole . unit That means the porphyrin unit . So now we can simply look at the corresponding . difference Only this particular ring is the . reduced ring So whenever we have . some important observations related to this . here also these particular important observations . we can have So this is also . containing N H and N H; that means this ligand . can function as L two minus through the protonation . and nicely it can bind to a . metal ion which can have a two positive charge . So a bipositive metal ion can bind nicely . to this particular system And when . one particular ring is different compared . to the pyrole unit; that means when we reduce . this thing that means we are reducing the . corresponding rigidity of the macrocyclic . structure . So already we have put some extra rigid structure . to this; because this we can have some idea . about the corresponding . macrocyclic living What we have discussed . earlier that if this ring is not there this . ring this ring and this ring so if four . rings are . there not there so from the tetraammine . system we can also have a corresponding macrocyclic . ring But once we put this rings . the system is getting more and more rigid . structure And that rigid structure is responsible . for some photochemical activation of . these things also . And once compared to the porphyrin ring . if we can have some reduced structure of this . particular version so we can have some . different types of orientation of this particular . ring; because here also we can have some suitable . substitutions on these positions . of the pyrole ring So the actual structure . of this is completely different for this; . because not only this chlorin ring So this . chlorin ring is there and in presence of . this photosynthesis it is binding to a\u2026 . metal ion It is not binding to the typical . transition . metal ion like iron in hemoglobin and myoglobin . but it is binding to the magnesium But still . it is colored So the color is not due . to the presence of magnesium it is due to . the presence of these all other rings which . are present in this particular organic . molecule; because organic molecules are sometimes . colored They can have the different type . of transition the \u2026 of transition . So when we have this magnesium initially . we can consider that it can have some interaction . because these two nitrogens through . the protonation of these nitrogens are charged . So the charge is there which is N minus and . this is also N minus And due to that . charge interaction we can consider the magnesium . can have a coordination number of two sitting . nicely inside this particular . pocket So what happens? When a tetrapyrole . unit is coming to us we can have some initial . binding from two of these nitrogens . Then all four nitrogens start interacting . with the metal center But in actual sense . these two nitrogens are also shows some . bonding interactions with the magnesium because . the pocket is there And once it is fitted . within the pocket these two nitrogens . are also showing some interactions And ultimately . we can get the corresponding structure where . the presence of magnesium . enhances the rigidity of the entire molecule . So not only this is a tetrapyrole system . but also we can have in this particular site; . where we just basically get the corresponding . nitrogen which is basically air And we . have a cyclopentanone ring So attached to . this porphyrin only one of this porphyrin . where we do not have the corresponding substitutions . We will have a cyclopentanone ring and we . will have some ether . backbone also So this cyclopentanone ring . is also enhancing the corresponding rigid . structure of this So this particular rigidity . of the molecule is responsible for light absorption; . because the photosynthesis is basically is . a basically a photochemical reaction . where H nu is activating for one sort of electron . transfer from this particular system to the . reduction for the carbon dioxide . So this particular type of binding for a . nonredox system so they will\u2026 if there . is an electron transfer it is not due to . the . presence of this metal ion So is this particular . system basically is responsible for absorbing . the light energy It is most suitable for . absorbing the typical light in the form of . H nu and it converts to the chemical energy . So the Coordination Chemistry the metal . and the ligand system is also responsible . for light harvesting What you call that? . It can absorb some amount of light energy . and . absorption of light energy is only dependent . on the metal ion coordination; because the . free backbone the free ligand is not . showing that activity for light absorption . And only it is specific to some metal ion . which is magnesium and synthetically prepared . which we can prepare in the laboratory . and substitution of this metal ion by some . other metal ion also so that they can show . some amount of light absorption That . means that spectroscopic properties they can . show but in the living system where the plants . are utilizing the photosynthetic green . pigment for light absorption in a particular . web length so and that particular web length . is responsible for the green color of the . leafy material So all the leaves are green . So this green material the green part is . coming out So other part the red part it . is . absorbing and that particular web length is . responsible for the typical excitation So . metal ion coordination to some biological . ligand is responsible for light absorption . in photosynthetic reactions . So we will see some other type; that means . the third category of these molecules which . is belongs to the vitamin B  And . vitamin B  now contains a corrin ring So . we can have porphyrin we can have the chlorin . ring and we can have now the corrin . ring So these are all just moving from one . system to the other And here also we see . that the connectivity is again through the . four pyrole ring And in some cases they are . reduced and this particular system when we . can have a different metal center is . utilized to bind And this is the corresponding . cobalt system So we can have a different . type of metal center and we can have a . different type of ligand for its coordination . to give us a vitamin system . So we have this particular ring So this . is fully reduced ring And the nature of this . we can compare with the porphyrin because . the structure would be definitely different . when it is in the free state That means . when it is not bound to the metal ion in . the . free state it has a different structure And . this particular connectivity is also different . We do not have the methyne connectivity . these carbon is not there It is a direct . connectivity between these two five membered . heterocyclic nitrogen bearing rings . And this connectivity is making or giving . us some smaller cavity size between these . four nitrogen And we can have one N H . group is available only So basically this . ligand can function as L one minus And the . structure is also different so it can have . some different binding potential to the metal . ion cobalt And when it is binding to the . cobalt center and most of the reactions we . get which is best on the cobalt one; because . it is providing only one negative charge . but the entire connectivity of the system . is . pretty complicated because in case of porphyrin . in case of myoglobin we have the corresponding . venal substitutions We can . have the corresponding propionic acid site . groups but here the biosynthetic route is . little bit complex to give us some pendant . groups which are there on the substitution . positions of the pyrole ring as the corresponding . amide functions . So most of them are amide So six of these . positions are amide functions then we can . have the dimethyl functions Here also we . can have the methyl substitutions So it . is pretty crowded molecule but the living . organisms do synthesize in our system So . nature is taken certain codes of reactions . where it can be synthesized nicely within . our system within our living system . And like myoglobin it also binds to a nitrogen . heterocycle which is benzimidazole Not the . imidazole but it is the benzimidazol\u2026 . So again the fifth position is coordinated . through some gen type of thing It is already . connected to the ring some phosphate . back bone and the sugar unit The phosphate . back bone and the sugar unit is controlling . the corresponding binding to the . imidazole\u2026 And the sixth position like . O  binding to the iron center in blood this . R is a typical one which we get Most of the . cases the corresponding compound is known . as cobalammine . And in the cobalammine if this is bound to . a methyl function the methyl group known . as the methylcobalamin function; where . we can have the strictly the carbon group . of the methyl group it is directly bound . to the cobalt center giving a corresponding\u2026 . this is the nitrogen of benzimidazole group . So what we get here is basically a cobalt . carbon bond also And the metal carbon . bond we all know that it is the corresponding . organometallic fragment This organometallic . fragment for this is the nature\u2019s first . organometallic compound which we are finding . in vitamin B  And most of these reactions . what is basically we are getting? . This R dominated by the corresponding cobalt . methyl functions . So this has also catalyzing some important . reactions such as the formation of the corresponding . methyl mercuric compounds; . because these compounds are easily formed . Then corresponding methyl arsenic compounds; . these compounds are all catalyzing . through this particular type of vitamin B .  or the B  like molecules So they do . catalyze the corresponding conversion of . typical metal salts because these are the . corresponding salts This is can be the corresponding . mercuric chloride; this can be . corresponding arsenic oxides\u2026 the corresponding\u2026chlorides . And they are immediately converted through . the use of any . methyl cobalammine type of catalyst to the . corresponding methyl\u2026 of the metal ions . So these are therefore some interesting group . of molecules which can catalyze number of . reactions; particularly some reactions . which can take place also in our body; so . the chemistry which is going on in our body . so that it can be hampered basically by . some biochemical path ways also It is well . known to ask that it is the water soluble . vitamin compound for availability is very . much required It is also used as some medicine . When we have the shortage of these vitamins . we should be supplemented by . use of vitamin B  or the cobalammine So . some wellknown brands of vitamin tablets . and capsules are available which . contains cobalammine Because they are required . for the normal functioning of brain; when . there is shortage there is some . abnormality in the brain functioning our . nervous system . So very important reaction systems are there . And the formation of the blood the formation . of the myoglobin and hemoglobin . molecules are also catalyzing by the presence . of this important cobalt compound that the . cobalt coordination compound of a . good biologically available ligand which . is our corrin ligand . So next we will just proceed for the nomenclature . of this coordination compound So the next . part of today\u2019s lecture we just . devote to the corresponding nomenclature . how we name a typical coordination compound; . because we can have a . corresponding species which is made up of . the metal And several ligands will be there . L can be there L prime can be there and . which is x and which can be y And within . square bracket we consider it is the corresponding . this is basically the corresponding . complex entity . So how we name  . the complex entity systematically within a . metal complex? That we will just see So . how we name a particular . coordination compound? So once simple compound . is forming so how we just go for naming a . typical coordination complex? So . what we do? We the first focus our attention . on the ligands and ligands should be named . in an alphabetical order So depending . upon the name of the ligands we should have . a choice And in alphabetical order we will . just name one after another So this is . during the naming which would this completely . different when we write in the formula And . that is also another task that how we . write a typical formula for a metal complex . So once the ligands are named we go for naming . one after another ligands Then we go for . naming the metal ions And then we . write down the oxidation state of metal ions . and which is subscribed by the corresponding . roman numerals in the bracket That . means if we have a corresponding oxidation . state of iron as two We will write in roman . numerals that it is a giving as a . corresponding middle complex in plus two oxidation . state or if it is a corresponding oxidation . state of say manganese in plus four . So we will write in the roman numeral within . bracket after manganese; that manganese is . present in plus four oxidation state . So some of this information we can also find . it in Wikipedia also And these are very . common and right informations . Everybody should have this information nowadays . because whenever we are talking about something . we talk about some mono . dentate ligands The most important and the . most common ligands system is the monodentate . ligands which we will see that . copper that is available in our nature So . how nature is giving us the copper? Nature . is not giving us the copper as the copper . metal So we do not go for mining to get . the corresponding copper in the nature . So we get some important compounds or important . corresponding inorganic compounds like copper . oxide copper sulphides and . all And if you see that we get a corresponding . compound like say copper carbonate or sometime . we will get as the basic copper . carbonate; that means copper carbonate copper . hydroxide double salt . So if these are there and if we dissolve . them in hydrochloric acid we get a corresponding . salt of copper chloride So what we . see that copper chloride so long it is in . the salt\u2026 structure And we are not getting . this as the correspond interactions So we . do . not have any idea about whether they are C . l minus groups So this C l minus groups . are the most important monodentate ligand . system which is also charged So this can . go and bind to the copper and giving rise . to a corresponding copper chlorine bond But . in such other cases we will find that if it . can help some x number of water of crystallizations . If x number of water of . crystallizations are present we immediately . end up with some other form of this salt which . we will write as bound water . molecules which is like this And we will . be writing the corresponding chlorides outside . the coordination sphere . So we get that is not having some copper . chlorine bond So copper chlorine bond is . not there instead we have some oxygen . bond So depending upon its coordination . number of number of water molecule bound to . copper so we have the copper oxygen . bond So what we see that if we can make . this that means this particular species . which is present as this one; that means . we . can go for its corresponding anhydrous form . That means this water will be lost So if . we just go for the corresponding anhydrous . form and we just supply some amount of say . hydrochloric acid or the corresponding potassium . chloride or any other salt whether . we should be able to form a corresponding . compound like C u C l  which will have two . negative charge And if potassium . chloride is supplied we will be getting as . K  C u C l  salt . Now water is not present and since four C . l is there which cannot be present as the . corresponding anions outside the . coordination sphere So all four copper chloride . groups can be bound to the copper center and . this can be a very good example . for the corresponding coordination compound . where you can have the monodentate coordination . of C l minus . So not only this C l but also we can have . the fluoro bromo iodo So all these things . so when you will you are talking about . some typical metals salts we should concentrate . or attention on the corresponding species . for this present depending upon the . number of species which is surrounding the . metal center; that means the coordination . number . If four of this B r groups are there they . are minus At present we get a corresponding . tetra bromo complex Similarly from water . derive species we can have two such hydroxo . and oxo When C N is bound we name it as . Cyano; when C N is bound through . this carbon we got this isocyano; \u2026thiosulphato . through oxygen; nitrito or nitro and this . is nitrito o and nitrito So these are the . two forms When it is bound through nitrogen . we call it as nitro; when it is bound through . oxygen we call it as nitrito; that we . will see when we will study the Isomerism; . the Linkage Isomerism basically Similarly . this thiocyanate anion can bind through . sulphur and it can bind through nitrogen . And we can have two different types of nomenclature . In one case we will consider it . as thiocyanato; in other case we will consider . them as isothiocyanato . So linkage isomerism also we will discuss . And in that particular case the nomenclature . of the compound will define whether the . metal center is typically bound through sulphur . or through nitrogen . So this is a part of the least what you can . have for the charge ligands then we can have . the neutral monodentate ligands As we . all the time we were seeing the Ammonia is . the very good ligand very old ligand and . very useful ligand to bind to a particular . metal center performing large number of corresponding . metal nitrogen bonds That means the ammine . complexes are plenty . Particularly the \u201cfather of Coordination . Chemistry\u201d Alfred Werner studied all this . reaction starting from this ammine ligands . So whenever we have the typical metal salt . like the corresponding ferric chloride of . ferrous chloride salts we see that the . depending upon the hydration number of hydration . we see that the water molecules are bound . to the metal center So the aqua . ligands were initially present Then the . addition of ammonia gives us the corresponding . substitution of aqua ligands by ammines . Then carbon monoxide can bind to the metal . center giving the corresponding carbonyl ligands . then magnesium oxide also and . related to ammine We can have the methylamine . and pyridines . So these are the some list of neutral monodentate . ligands we can also have seen the\u2026 form . of ethylenediammine So in the . formula we will not write the big name of . ethylenediammine we will abbreviate it has . e n Similarly the charged ligand which is . bidentate also the oxylate ion from the oxalic . acid which binds to the metal center through . two oxygen atoms are known as the . corresponding oxalato group Similarly ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid; . on ethylenediammine backbone if we substitute . all four . hydrogens by four acetic acid substrates . then we get the corresponding ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid . And in the anionic form . when four of them are deprotonated we get . ethylenediaminetetraacetato coordination . So what we see next then? Ligand then metal . centers and how to find out the corresponding . oxidations states So balancing the . entire molecule we get the corresponding oxidation . state So what we see therefore that we . are taking a very useful example of . cobalt compound which we prepare from cobalt . two chloride by the addition of ammonia . So excess ammonia when we put and if we start . from cobalt task chloride and in presence . of activated charcoal we pass air or . we add hydrogen peroxide So the addition . of hydrogen peroxide or passing of air can . oxidize this cobalt two cobalt three So . we have hexaamminecobalt three So this particular . thing that means how you assign the oxidation . state of this as plus three; . because this compound will be known as the . hexaamminecobalt three chloride . So if the charge on these because we have . started our journey we have started this . reaction to make this particular compound . from cobalt task chloride So through oxidation . of this and additional chloride supply we . will give you this corresponding . compound as C l  So if we just measure . the corresponding solution electrical conductivity . or the molar conductance that . means lambda M so lambda M value will be . different which will be corresponding to one . is to three electrolyte type And that . value will tell us that it has three chloride . anions outside the coordination sphere And . the corresponding oxidation state of this . cobalt center is in plus three . So if we have a corresponding oxidation state; . that means the charge this particular charge . we should assign And cobalt then . be designated as cobalt three in roman numeral . So the name of this cationic species will . be therefore the cobalt three when we . assign as cobalt three which will be hexaamminecobalt . three If three chloride anions are outside . the full name of the compound . would be hexaamminecobalt three chloride . Similarly if this is there where six cyanide . amines are bound to this iron site and . when it is bound to this iron cite and depending . upon the charge cyanide amine is providing; . that means it is providing fixed . anionic charge And this particular iron . can have two oxidation states One is plus . two another is plus three In this particular . case if three potassium cations are required . for charge neutralization the iron oxidation . state should be plus three . If four are required the iron oxidation state . would be plus two One is known as ferrocyanide; . another is known as ferricyanide . So in this particular case the name of the . compound were potassium hexacyanoferrate; . because we are naming this particular . part as the anionic part And the anionic . part would be named as the corresponding Latin . name with some ending where the . suffix as eight with the corresponding oxidation . states in bracket . Similarly when we have the mix ligands instead . of six amine ligands we can have four amine . and two chlorine inside And . assignment of the oxidation state of the metal . center is important And since four of these . amine groups are present we get the . corresponding ligands as tetraammine Alphabetically . we are writing A first then dichlorocobalt . three chloride So . tetraamminedichlorocobalt three chloride is . the corresponding naming for the required . species where the cobalt center is present . in the plus three oxidation state . Then we just change; that means instead of . all ammine functionality on iron around iron . we change one two N O the nitric . oxide gas That N O is present in some different . form also through some internal electron transfer . This N O can be present as the . corresponding charges N O plus so this is . as N O plus this iron is F e  plus So . we can have overall balance with the three . chloride anions So iron will be present . is in plus two oxidation state . So this is the wellknown brown ring tests . we can have where you can have the water . molecule so that here And the \u2026 of . nitric oxide from the nitric oxide will bind . to the iron center and brown ring compound . You know it can be formed which is a . test for nitrate and nitrite anions But . immediately this N O is forming or transforming . to the corresponding N O plus That is why . the assignment of these oxidation state is . important and it depends on the corresponding . nature of the N O So this particular . molecule will be named as pentaammminenitrosyliron . II chloride . Similarly one more example is that where . like N O we just go for the corresponding . carbon monoxide Six such carbonmonoxide . molecules can bound to the chromium centers . since carbon monoxide molecules are all neutral . and we do not have anything . outside the coordination sphere; that means . outside the square brackets So that means . your chromium center is in the zero . oxidation state So the chromium zero also . can give rise to the metal complex where carbon . monoxide can nicely bind to the . chromium center So not only this mononuclear . species there are large number of multinuclear . species are also present . And that multinuclear species can have several . types of these carbon monoxide ligands So . in one case we can have this carbon . monoxide where all the six C O molecules . are binding to the chromium center in monodentate . fashion In some other case we . can have the bridging carbon monoxide And . some spectroscopic techniques are also available . which can identify the nature of . the carbon monoxide; not only in the mononuclear . species but also in some poly nuclear or . the carbonyl\u2026molelecule So the . name of this compound through the assignment . of chromium oxidation state as zero would . be hexacarbonylchromium  . This also very good starting material for . different types of chromium compound organometallic . chromium compound where . chromium zero oxidation is utilized Then . vanadium can also give rise to similar type . of carbonyl compound but the . corresponding charge on the vanadium is different; . which is V one minus Vanadium can be this . particular one can be because it . is balancing the corresponding potassium charge . as K plus So this is the corresponding anionic . part vanadium bearing part is the . anionic part where carbon monoxide is neutral . Therefore the vanadium is in the plus one . oxidation state which will be known as . potassiumhexacarbonylvanadate one minus So . it is a potassium salt And like chromium . it also has six carbonyl compounds six . carbonyl molecules surrounding the vanadium . in octahedral geometry . Then the last example on this series is that . nitrosyl of more number Here the nitrosyl . was present with one number When three . nitrocyl is present along with one carbonyl . we get the corresponding compound And manganese . is present in minus three . oxidation state which is trinitrosylcarbonylmanganese . minus three So the manganese is getting . some electron which is the back . bonding from the carbon monoxide and the nitrosyl; . because all these nitrosyl they are N O plus . So that electron is basically . dumping over the manganese So manganese . is basically accommodating the corresponding . more number of electrons So . manganese is present in the minus three oxidation . state; that means three extra electrons are . transfer to the manganese site . So one more example we will just see which . will continue to our next class also That . is the very good example where the . ligands which are present within the iron . site is that C N and the N O So two types . of ligands are present which is bound to . the . iron site; and for the typical charge balance . if we considered this N O as the N O plus . we get the corresponding compound of . this and how we just go for this particular . compound; that we will continue to our next . class . So we have this iron and we have six coordination . sites And this six coordination sites will . all be occupied by C N And one of . them will be occupied by N O So the assigning . of this iron oxidation state is important . That we will discuss And that we will . discuss how we can assign the corresponding . oxidation state on the N O and what should . be the corresponding charge on this . particular species that how many anions or . how many cations will be there following or . preceding the corresponding complex . species; that we will try to find it out . So that gives us the entire formula of the . compound and that will also straight line . the . corresponding naming of that compound . Thank you .  . ']